FROM an opinion that a recital of my adventures through life may be useful to
society, I have been induced to give them to the world; and flatter myself that
if they have not a tendency to make men philosophers, they, at least, will
teach them worldly knowledge, and show them, that he is the richest and
happiest of mortals, whose resources are within himself, and who depends least
upon the assistance of others.

WHO my parents were, is, indeed, very immaterial, but it may be necessary to
say, that I am the only child of a very respectable, though not very opulent
couple. My father's name was Wilbraham; he was descended from the younger
branch of a good family; and though his estate in the county of Nottingham did
not exceed one hundred pounds a year, pride of blood prevented his putting me
out to any trade, but made him ambitious of bringing me up, as he called it, a
Gentleman. One hundred a year was a scanty pittance to encourage such notions;
but he lived, as half the world does, upon expectation; looked forward to the
death of an uncle, mortgaged his little patrimony to keep up appearances, and
died, as the common phrase is, some hundreds of pounds worse than nothing. The
only advantage I received from him was a tolerable education, acquired at a
grammar school in the neighborhood. As he could not afford me a horse, nor any
of those rural indulgencies, which young gentlemen are taught to expect, I was
under the necessity of seeking my amusement at home, and I have blessed myself
since a thousand times, in that necessity. Being fond of study, I became master
of the Classicks, and the vicar of the parish, who professed to have my
interest much at heart, furnished me with the loan of such books, as he thought
would improve my mind, and which our circulating library did not possess. By
the time I was nineteen, I became, through these means, a tolerable proficient
in history, and the belles lettres, and was thought to be a pretty good
scholar; nor did I want the outward accomplishments of a gentleman. My father
took care I should learn to dance, and the fencing-master who attended at the
school where I was bred, finding me, as he was pleased to say, an active,
well-made young man, gave me, voluntarily, a sufficient number of lessons on
the small sword, to enable me to defend myself, was I ever attacked in that
way. This, added to a natural gaiety of temper, led me into the good graces of
many; and had he left me his little estate unincumbered, I should have passed
through life without any difficulty. As it is, few men have experienced a
greater vicissitude of fortune, or more embarrassments. My father caught the
small pox, and my mother, who loved him too tenderly to quit the house, though
she had never had that disorder, imprudently busied herself about him, caught
the infection, and I was thus deprived of both my parents at once; she fell a
sacrifice to the distemper a few days after my father, and they were both
buried in the same grave.

WITH the assistance of my good friend the vicar, I soon looked round me, and
found I had nothing to depend on but myself; the mortgagees seized the estate,
which, owing to the decrease in value of land, was barely sufficient to pay the
money borrowed; and the cash into which his furniture, and other things were
converted, was divided among his creditors, and did not pay more than twelve
shillings in the pound; so that had not the vicar felt for my situation, I
should not have known how to have acted. Application was made to my father's
uncle, but to no manner of purpose. His answer was, I had been brought up a
Gentleman, and he should now see how I could make out upon the profession: he
had never been consulted upon my education, and was determined not to give me a
shilling: I might apply to my mother's relations, (who, by the by, were not in
a situation to assist me) he desired never to hear any thing of me. In short,
had it not been for the humanity of the vicar, who procured me a collection of
fifty pounds among the neighboring gentry, and who took me into his house,
till my father's affairs were adjusted, I might have been turned out into the
street a vagrant. To him I am indebted for the first good office I experienced,
and I am sure it was disinterested. -- The God of Compassion taught him mercy,
-- and he practiced it where he could.

THE next step the vicar took, was to find a situation to place me in. He had a
brother who kept a school in the neighborhood of London, to him he applied,
and prevailed on him to take me in as an assistant. Part of my money was
expended in equiping me with necessaries, and on the eve of my departure, which
was soon after, on counting my wealth, I found myself possessed of three ten
pound bank notes, and five pounds fifteen shillings in cash; more money than I
ever was master of, and of which I simply thought, I never should see the end.
My good friend advised me to husband it to the utmost, and with this view I
took a place to London on the roof of the coach; but that no future situation
of mine might hurt the pride of my father's family, I changed my name, and
called, myself, Gabriel Outcast.
