THE first day's journey passed tolerably well. It was fine weather, and I had
a companion on the roof, an itinerant pedlar. The passengers within were, a
footman and two maid servants of a Nottinghamshire Baronet, an outrider to a
tradesman in London, and a smuggler; so that in point of company, I thought
myself as happy without, as I should have been within. The only knowledge I
could gather from the pedlar, was some part of the mysteries of his profession:
he took a great deal of pains to persuade me he was a rascal; such as that,
under a traveling license, and the idea of selling things cheap, the articles
he dealt in were of the worst kind, and generally damaged, for which he got the
best price, and very often sold goods to the ignorant and unwary thirty per
cent. dearer than they could be bought for of the fair dealer. However, I had
nothing to do with him; as I did not set up for a corrector of other men's
conduct, I left him in the enjoyment of his iniquity, and we passed through the
day as sociable as beggars generally are; for I determined on my first outset,
to bring my mind, if possible, to a conformity with the humility of any
situation I might be thrown into. But, notwithstanding my philosophy, I found
myself rather hurt at the close of the day. Though riding on the roof of the
coach, I considered myself, from family, from education, from property, much
superior to those within; but my thinking so did not lead the landlord of the
inn where we were to sleep, and his wife, to think the same. I found a manifest
difference between riding without, and riding within. The pedlar, accustomed to
such traveling, took his place, instantly on alighting, in the corner of the
kitchen chimney; but on my engaging the attention of the chambermaid, to whom I
addressed myself very civilly, she was soon routed by her mistress, with a I
wish to God, Betty, you would leave that fellow, and attend to the inside
passengers. It was in vain for me to plead a headache, and a wish to be shown
to my chamber. She told me, that she had no beds but for the gentlemen and
ladies that came in the coach, and that I must turn into the loft or the
stable. In vain did Betty argue in my favor, in vain did she say, that I and
the gentleman in the chimney-corner, meaning the pedlar, might lay together in
the spare garret; nothing would do, till I pulled out my purse, and asked her
to change me a ten pound note: for one of the notes I had lodged in my purse,
the others were safe stowed in my trunk. The naming of a ten pound note altered
her tone, she begged my pardon for not being able to attend to me in the hurry
she was in; but that if I could dispense with laying at the top of the house
with my fellow-traveller, the bed was a good one, and it should be clean
sheeted. I was too fatigued, and too much shaken with my journey, to be very
nice about my lodging; I could have slept upon the boards. I told her, I would
get something warm to drink, settle the matter with my fellow-traveller, and
when the chambermaid had waited on the coach gentry, I would be shown to my
room. Finding the benefit I derived from the naming a bank note, I began again
to display my wealth, in order to get consequence at the fireside, -- and I
discovered, that it not only procured me the warmest place, but the attention
of the whole kitchen. A butcher in the further corner observed to me, that he
had known gem'men ride upon the roof of the coach through choice, for his part
he never rode any where else; it was pleasanter, and he could nater the
country. In short, after a few ceremonies about place were adjusted, and a few
coals laid on, we presently became acquainted, and the state of the nation was
debated on. The butcher said, the minister was a man of his own kidney, that he
handled a knife well, and got to the bottom of a wound at once; did not stand
niggling as some of our statesmen do, but when he cut, cut at a single stroke,
and chopped off every unnecessary part of the constitution at a blow: Yes, yes,
says an exciseman, who sat opposite to him, he does cut, with a vengeance; I am
sure I have reason to say so, for he has cut me out of a vote for the county,
and now, in all probability, I may lose my place. And no harm, replies the
butcher, if you was. D -- me, it would be happy for this country if there
was not an exciseman in it. We should then have our beer at half price, "Yes, by
G-d," returns the exciseman, rogues would be then triumphant. Finding the
conversation grow warm, I consulted the pedlar, and we retired to our chamber;
we paid our reckoning, however, first; for the landlady told us, it was
customary for all outside passengers to pay for their beds before they slept in
them, as it saved a world of trouble in the morning; and it was lucky for me
that this custom was complied with; for my display of my money at the fireside
had so fascinated the attention of the pedlar, that he thought proper to rise
an hour before the coach set off, and make free with my purse and its contents,
which laid in my breeches pocket, on the chair beside me; but which from the
sound sleep I was in, I was insensible of his taking. All I know is, that
having paid my reckoning the night before, I had no occasion for money in the
morning, and never missed it, till I wanted to pay for my breakfast; and that
the pedlar had taken it was beyond a doubt, as he was seen to leave the inn
with his wallet before the coachman was visible, and had not, though he had
taken his place for London, paid any part of his fare. As we are apt to make
the best of misfortunes, like the philosopher, who having broke his leg,
rejoiced that it was not his neck, I consoled myself in not having lost my
trunk, that having been committed to the care of the coachman, in which the
remainder of my money was stowed, and of which I determined to be more careful.

WE had now no one on the outside but the coachman and myself whom I addressed
in his own way, and whom a glass of brandy or gin at every village where he
stopped, had made very eloquent and communicative. This will be a d-mned poor
journey for me, says he, nobody without, and none but beggars within! -- for I
found his attention was always engrossed with what he should get upon the road.
I asked him, if he was not paid by his master? Yes, by G-d, says he, after a
manner, -- twelve shillings a week, -- which will scarce find me in gin and
tobacco. If it was not now and then for a generous passenger, we coachmen might
starve. It Is true we get a shilling or two occasionally, by a short passenger,
or for the carriage of a parcel that is not booked, but that is a poor pittance
in these hard times. On my observing to him, that these occasional shillings
were, in my opinion, the property of his master: "Are they by G-d?" says he,
then the devil may drive his coach for me. -- No, no master, we don't stand all
weathers, late and early, for twelve shillings a week; I have known coachmen
get three guineas, and richly deserve it too. -- But not honestly? -- Yes,
honestly. My coach carries four, and if I now and then pick up a fifth upon the
road, how is he the worse for it? In short, as it is in vain to dispute with a
man against his interest, I dropped the argument, and contented myself with
general topics, till we arrived at the inn, where we were to breakfast, and
where I first discovered the friendliness of my last night's bedfellow, who,
finding me embarrassed, as he thought, with too much money, was kind enough to
ease me of part of it. However, as I knew not his name, and he was a stranger
to the house where we lodged, I could do no otherwise than reconcile myself to
the loss, have recourse to my trunk, and supply my pocket afresh. Nothing of
any consequence happened the remainder of the day; I was set down at Highgate,
five miles short of London, where the vicar's brother resided; and as I tipped
the coachman a shilling, I had his blessing at parting; so easy is it to
procure the good wishes of these blades of the whip!
