I WAS now once more master of myself, and had an employment to seek; but was
very low in cash, so low, that I could not remain long out of place. I had
recourse again to the newspapers, and applied as the following advertisement
directed me: Wanted a smart young man as footman to a lady. She lived in a
well-furnished house, in a genteel street at the west end of the town; I went
in the morning, and was introduced to her whilst at her breakfast. A^ I was
pretty well dressed, and came into the room perhaps in a manner different from
what footmen in general do, she rose from her seat, and when I told her I
waited on her in consequence of her advertisement, she seemed rather confused,
and said, She presumed, that either I did not apply for myself, or that her
place would be below my acceptance, for that her servant must wear a livery. I
told her, an overthrow in life had humbled my mind, and reconciled it to any
situation that was not dishonest or laborious, and that as to wearing the
livery of a lady, it was what my superiors would be proud of. She seemed to
smile at my answer, and doubt my sincerity, and freely acknowledged that my
manner and language would do credit to a gentleman. She asked me if I had ever
lived in the capacity of a servant? I told her, I had, and should be happy to
be here is. A very few words further passed between us, she condescended to say,
She was so pleased with my appearance that she should inquire no further about
me, I carried too much honesty in my face to need any other recommendation. She
said, she had engaged a servant, but that she would put him off, and take me in
his stead; that her place was not a fatiguing one, it was little more than to
wait upon herself, and that if I would accept of it with eighteen guineas a
year, and a livery, I might come as soon as I pleased. I bowed an assent, and
told her, I would attend her the Monday following. She gave me a direction to
her tailor, in order to get a new livery, and desired I would make my first
appearance in it. -- The livery was white, faced and lined with pale blue,
silver buttons and epaulet, with a waistcoat of the color of the facings,
laced with silver, blue plush breeches, and silver laced hat; and the tailor
having made it smart, and to fit me exactly, paid me the compliment to say,
that I rather graced the livery, than the livery me, and among all the servants
he had dressed, he had never seen one that became his clothes so well. It is
rather an awkward task to be under the necessity of sounding one's own praise,
but as the reader can hear nothing of one who writes his own life, but from the
mouth of him who guides the pen, and as he may wish to have some little
description of my person, the following is the simplest account I can give. I
was, at the time I am now speaking of, a strait well-made man, five feet nine
inches high, of a middling size, neither too corpulent nor too thin, just
turned of twenty, dark hair, and a great deal of it, had a good set of teeth,
and if glasses told truth, a speaking countenance, and a penetrating eye. I was
given to understand, that I had a graceful figure, an insinuating address, and
the manner of a gentleman; with these perfections and accomplishments, and the
education I had received, with a good flow of spirits, and sanguine health, it
must have been wonderful had I not pushed on through life as well as I have
done. I must own that whenever I fell, it was through the impetuosity of
passions, the heedlessness of youth, or want of worldly knowledge. I set out
with very few expectations, and fewer friends; but I had philosophy enough to
acquire a certain degree of fortitude, and was determined to be a cosmopolite,
and take the world as it goes.

HAVING arranged my little matters at the house where I lodged, I dressed my
hair in the most fashionable manner, which from custom I was expert at, put on
a ruffled shirt, silk stockings, and a pair of Artois buckles; and when I
surveyed myself in the glass, dressed as I was in my new clothes, I thought
myself a complete coxcomb: however, as I flattered myself, from the livery my
mistress gave, and her being pleased with my appearance, she would not like me
the worse for that; I sent my trunk to her house by a porter on the Monday I
had promised to go, and followed it soon after myself.

MY lady was a woman about forty years of age, that seemed to have been
handsome in her youth; her figure was rather em bon point, and she passed for a
widow under the name of Duplex. On my coming to her house, she sent for me up
stairs, and I could perceive, was not a little pleased with the figure I made.
She told me that I became my livery exceedingly well, that she kept a boy to
clean shoes and knives, and that all she expected of me, was to wait at table,
and attend upon her. Having inquired my name, "Gabriel," says she, you seem to
be a young man of uncommon good sense, I presume I need not tell you, that
servants should carry nothing out of the families they live with, nor see any
thing they ought not to see. If you attend to this, and are industrious and
civil, you will find me exceedingly good to you.

I HAD not been a fortnight in this house before I discovered that my mistress
was one of those convenient obliging women, who administered to the pleasures
of others. She was not, is the true sense of the word, a procuress, nor did she
keep ladies of easy virtue under the roof with her; but her house was rather in
the style of a private bagnio, where men of fortune might find an asylum with
their ladies, for an hour, a night, or a week, as it suited them. She had not
the least conception of my finding this out, the parties that came, having
always passed for her friends, and my fellow servants, who had not my
penetration, were kept in the dark. I might, if I pleased, have continued long
in the service of this woman, had not an event taken place which gave birth to
a variety of future embarrassments in the course of my life. My mistress was
particularly kind to me, and would familiarly converse with me all the time I
was waiting on her. She took some pains to draw me aside from the narrow path
of rectitude, and gave me many broad hints of the favors she had in store for
me. She would frequently ring the bell and call me to her toilet, even before
she had well adjusted her dress; ask my opinion of female beauty, and often
desire me to tell her, whether her handkerchief was put on to advantage.
"Gabriel," says she one day to me, leering under her hat, -- You cannot have
been in many places; pretty young fellows like you, are soon taken out of
servitude. You shall not wear a livery long, but shall be groom of my bedchamber.
-- What say you Gabriel? Should you like such an office? -- I plainly saw at
what she directed her artillery; but she was a woman that did not please me,
and I will be honest enough to own, that aversion had more weight with me than
principle. She was at all times very inquisitive about my family and
connexions, and was very importunate to know where I acquired those
accomplishments, she was pleased to say I possessed; but, as I did not mean to
continue longer with her than I could help, I was reserved in my answers, and
respectful, though very distant, in my replies. She told me, she expected a
young lady from the country in a day or two, to be with her some time; that a
family difference would oblige her to leave home, and that her being with her
was to be a secret; of course, if I could keep a close mouth, I should be amply
rewarded; and that I was by no means to communicate to my fellow servants, any
thing I might hear or see above stairs. I replied, that she might rely on my
fidelity, with which she seemed satisfied. I was the more displeased with my
mistress, as I conceived her to be of a profession, the most destructive to
female virtue, and the greatest bane to domestic happiness of any existing. The
pride of many an honest family had been overthrown, I understood, by her; and
many a virtuous girl had owed her ruin to her officiousness. That there are
many of her stamp in the great metropolis is too evident to be doubted, and
that they are not made public examples of, is very much to be lamented! The
young lady my mistress mentioned, was brought to our house one morning, by a
gentleman in a hackney coach. She appeared to be about seventeen, and was one
of the prettiest young women, I think, I ever beheld; with such a sweetness of
expression and such a virgin modesty about her, as attracted all my attention,
and made me instantly conceive something treacherous in her story. The
gentleman that accompanied her, seemed to be a man of fashion about thirty
years of age, and I could see, that on his introducing her to my mistress, she
had never seen her before. The affair appeared to me mysterious, I felt myself,
some how or other interested in her cause, and was determined, if she was
incautiously seduced into this house, to watch her virtue with as much care and
assiduity, as if she had been my sister. The gentleman dined with her, staid
the greatest part of the day, but left her in the evening. He continued his
visits, in like manner, the next day and the day after, and during the times I
was waiting on them, I could discover nothing more than that industrious
attention, which polite men generally pay to the object of their affections.
She seemed to take a more than common notice of me, and observed to my
mistress, which I overheard, when in the next room, that she was persuaded from
my manner, that I must have been brought up a gentleman. Things went on pretty
smooth for two or three days, when my mistress took an opportunity to go out,
and left them to themselves. They drank tea alone, and I waited at tea, and
nothing happened to increase my suspicions till about nine in the evening, when
I heard a clattering of the chairs, and their voices rather louder than
ordinary. This put me upon the watch, and presently I heard her scream with all
her powers. I instantly flew up stairs, darted into the room, and found her
fainting on the sopha, and he in a situation better conceived than described,
but very declaratory of his wicked intentions. On seeing me enter the room, he
seized me by the collar, with Rascal, who sent for you? Get out of the room
this instant or I Will be the death of you; catching hold of his sword, which he
drew. I told him the lady seemed to need protection, and I would defend her
with my life. The poor young creature, that moment recovering her senses,
begged of me, for God's sake, to continue with her, and save her from ruin. The
gentleman, on the other hand, in the utmost rage and pushing me from him,
insisted on my leaving the room or he would run me through the body; and finding me
determined not to obey his injunctions, unarmed as I was, he made a lunge at
me, which having parried with my hand, I closed in upon him and disarmed him.
The young lady screamed and fainted again, and her ravisher took up his hat,
hurried down stairs, and made the best of his way out of the house. He was no
sooner gone, than I assisted her with some hartshorn, which I found on the
mantle-piece, and brought her to her speech. Seeing herself free from her
violator, she called me, her deliverer, thanked me, in the warmest terms, for
standing forth in her defense, and hoped I was not hurt; for when she saw him
draw his sword, she expected nothing less than my murder. I told her I was no
way hurt but to see her so ill-treated, that he had endeavored to run his
sword through me, but, that from some knowledge I had of the use of that
weapon, I had escaped the threatened mischief, and had disarmed him; that he
had left me in possession of his sword and was gone, and that I esteemed myself
singularly happy in having been her protector. She rose from the sopha, walked
across the room to a chair, and begged me by no means to leave her, but to sit
down and concert some means with her, of getting her out of that house, which,
from many circumstances she suspected to be of no reputation. She told me, that
she was the daughter of a private gentleman of good family and fortune, that
her name was Wildman, that the person who had so treated her, was a man of rank
who had solicited her hand in marriage; but his father being alive, and he not
being able to make a sufficient settlement on her, her father had opposed the
match; that this gentleman, however, having gained her affections, she had been
so imprudent as to leave her home, and come here with him, as into the house of
a friend; where they were privately to be married and wait the reconciliation
of her father; that under a variety of frivolous pretenses he had delayed the
ceremony and she now saw the drift of his base intentions; that his conduct had
at once obliterated every spark of her attachment, and that, if possible, she
now hated him more than ever she loved him. This being her story, she asked me
what I thought she had best do? I told her frankly, that I thought the sooner
she was out of this house the better, for reasons, if she pleased, I would
hereafter give her; that as she seemed determined not to pursue the motives
that led her to leave her father's house, namely, that of giving her hand to a
man who had such designing views upon her honor, I would by all means advise
her to return, acknowledge her indiscretion to her father, and as he would now,
from what had passed, have no reason to dread her elopement with the same
person in future, I flattered myself he would readily forgive her. This advice
she immediately closed with, and was anxious to leave the house before my
mistress returned; I encouraged the step, told her, if she thought proper, I
would fetch a coach from the stand, at the end of the street, and attend her
home. She agreed to this; I called a coach, handed her into it, in the presence
of two of the maidservants who were standing in the passage, and having
privately told the coachman, to drive to Berkley-square where her father lived;
I got up behind and the coach drove from the door.

WHEN we were got two or three streets length from the house, she stopped the
coach, and begged to speak to me. It was to direct me to knock but a single rap
at the door, and to tell the servant that opened it, that she wished her father
not to know of her return, till she had seen her mother. When we reached the
house, I obeyed her directions; she parted with me at the door, but desired me
not to say who she was, nor where I had left her; and if I could get out in the
morning, that I would be with her between eleven and twelve. On my return home
I found my mistress was above, and that she was extremely angry with the steps
I had taken. As soon as she heard I was in the house, the bell was rung, and I
appeared before her. "Gabriel," says she, with warmth, what is this you have
done? -- Where have you left Miss? I gave her a particular account of every
thing that I knew had happened in her absence; and as I had determined to quit
her service, I gave her to understand, that she had a great deal to answer for;
that from the story she had told me, prior to the young lady's coming to her
house, I was convinced that she was privy to the scheme laid for her
destruction, and that I esteemed myself particularly fortunate in being the
cause of its prevention. Where have you carried her to? says she. -- That
Ma'am, replied I, I am not at liberty to divulge; she is, I trust, in safe
hands, and out of the way of any similar danger. Harkye, Gabriel, says she, you
may possibly think yourself exceedingly clever, but I must tell you that you
are a very impudent fellow, to take any such liberties in a house where you are
only a servant. But I deserve it, in taking you without a character; the only
thing that vexes me is, that I should have been at any expense for so worthless
a scoundrel. However, strip and turn out, you shall not lay another night under
my roof. Madam, replied I, was you to reflect a moment, you would be careful
not to irritate one that has you so much in his power; if it was not for the
means it has afforded me of rescuing a deluded young lady from the violence of
a ravisher, I should regret the hour of coming within your doors; as it is,
Madam, I esteem myself happy in having entered your service, and shall think
myself equally so, in quitting it. I am directed to ask you for the small trunk
belonging to the lady, which if you think proper to deliver, it may save a
further enquiry into your conduct, and I shall then leave your clothes and take
my own. Oh! I might have it, she said, She wanted nothing belonging to the
minx, nor ever desired to hear of either of us again! Accordingly having got
her trunk, I called a coach, put off her finery, dressed myself in my own
clothes, took leave of my fellow servants and made the best of my way to my
former lodging, where, though late at night, I found an admission.

THE next morning I waited on Miss Wildman, at the appointed time, who,
appearing in a morning dress, seemed lovely in the extreme; and I had the
pleasure to receive, from her angelic tongue, her grateful thanks, for her
miraculous preservation. She told me, she was still more obliged to me for the
advice I had given her, which had reconciled her to the best of parents, and
without which she should have forfeited that love she never was so sensible of
till now. She asked me "what reception I had met with from my mistress on my
return?" I related every particular, and told her I had brought away her trunk:
and though I had lost my place, I did not fear getting another, having done no
otherwise than as justice and duty had compelled me. She gave me to understand
that her father wished to see me, and begged I would stay in the servants hall,
till he had an opportuity of speaking with me. I was no sooner at liberty, but
the servants flocked about me, and thanked me by their looks, as well as words,
for restoring to them their lost young lady; they told me how much she was
beloved by the whole family and how much they feared their master would never
more have received her; but they were joyfully disappointed; that her
contrition for her conduct, had wrought her reconciliation so effectually, that
they believed her father and mother loved her now more affectionately than ever.

Mr. Wildman soon sent for me up, and with tears in his eyes, thanked me for
having been the deliverer of his child; he said, she had seen, he believed, her
indiscretion, had repented of her conduct, and of course, was more endeared to
him than ever: he told me, she had acquainted him with so much of the story, as
her senses permitted her to be witness of; and he would be glad to hear the
remainder from me. I related it to him in the manner it happened, and when I
had finished the tale, he, with a degree of enraptured enthusiasm, flew to me
and embraced me; blubbered out the sentiments of a grateful heart for the
kindness I had done both him and her, and assured me he would be a friend to me
for ever. There was a gallantry, he said, and greatness in my conduct, that
would do honor to the first of characters, and as he heard I had lost my place
in the cause, he would take me into his service, and I should be immediately
about his person. He put into my hand a fifty pound bank-note and told me he
would give me one every year, whilst I thought proper to continue with him.
Poor as I was, I modestly refused the note, saying, I was amply gratified in
having merited his good wishes and his daughter's: but he replied, fifty pounds
he hoped would not hurt me, and insisted on my taking it. He then told me, he
could employ his present valet, at an estate he had in the country, and I might
come to him when I thought proper; I accepted his proposal, and replied, that,
if agreeable to him, I would attend him the next day. Matters being thus
adjusted, I returned to my lodging, and prepared to removemy little baggage the
next morning; but curiosity leading me to enquire at Mrs. Duplex's, whether the
gentleman had called or sent for his sword, or whether my fellow servants had
heard their mistress say any thing concerning me, I called there in the
evening, under a pretense of returning a cork-screw I had inadvertently taken
away in my pocket, and was admitted privately into the kitchen; where I was
soon told, that the gentleman had been there for his sword, and that both he
and my mistress had vowed vengeance against me, whenever they could find me. I
smiled at their menaces and left the house as secretly as I entered it.

CHAP VIII.
THE next day put me in possession of my new place, to which I was the more
eager to go, as it would give me an opportunity of occasionally seeing Miss
Wildman, an attachment to whom, I found, maugre the great distance between us,
grew insensibly upon me; and dangerous and fruitless as the thought might be, I
could not but indulge it. I called to my remembrance, that, in the course of my
reading, far more unlikely things had come to pass than what I coveted. She had
now no penchant for any man; the late object of her affections, from his
villainous conduct, was become odious to her; she had noticed me, even before
the late accident happened, in a very favorable light; -- she seemed endowed
with an uncommon share of sensibility: -- she owed me attention -- she owed me
gratitude; -- and she called me her protector and deliverer. -- On the other
hand, -- I was conscious in having been bred up a gentleman -- of having had a
liberal education -- of having good connexions and being allied to a good
family and fortune; for my father's uncle, though he would do nothing for me,
was possessed of an estate of four thousand pounds a year, and there were only
two persons, the children of my father's elder brother, between me and that
estate, and these persons unmarried. -- With such chimerical, such fugitive
notions, did I now and then amuse myself. I was determined, however, not to
offend the family I was in; but to watch and wait patiently for that critical
moment, if ever it should arrive, that might give a more favorable turn to my
pretensions. Our family consisted of my master, my mistress, and their
daughter, who were Roman Catholics, and of a great num-of servants; and it
seemed a very happy one, when I first became a part of it; but, as I was a
favorite up stairs, I soon became obnoxious below. I studied, all I could, to
conciliate the affections of my fellow servants, but that demon Jealousy, which
seldom takes possession of the human mind, but it makes it see things through a
false medium, and gives a different color to transactions, than what they
naturally bear; this jealousy poisoned all their tempers, and every thing they
did for me was more than I deserved: my shoes and buckles were not half
cleaned; the knife I was to eat with did not cut; the bread I was helped to,
was dry; the bear flat, and as I was generally attending upon my master, at the
usual time of breakfast, in the house-keeper's room; when I came down to eat
mine, the muffins were gone, the water was cold, and the cream was slopped. In
short, there seemed to be a conspiracy against me, and for no fault of mine
that I was conscious of; I was too much of a gentleman for a servant; I wanted
two or three to wait upon me, and I studied nothing but dress, affected airs
and fine language. -- I bore all this very patiently, for what will not a
person bear with a favorite object in view? I imputed their conduct to
ignorance and low-breeding, and prided myself in returning good for evil. My
master, who ufed always to converse with me, when I was dressing, would treat
me more as a friend than as a servant, and with a degree of concern, would
often complain to me of the conduct of his people below; at which times I
always took pains to excuse their faults, and explain away their errors; but
this availed me but little, they were not sensible of my good wishes toward
them; and hated, me merely because I was beloved by their master and mistress.
All I could do, in the present situation of things, was to make a friend of
Miss Wildman's maid, and which I aimed at for more reasons than one; as it
would facilitate my intercourse with her mistress, and she was disposed to get
me my breakfast, which was my best meal, in her own room. She was a
good-natured woman, about thirty years of age, and greatly in her young lady's
favor. Through her, I learned that Miss Wildman had expressed the highest
regard for me, and wished for an opportunity of being of use to me: she had
frequently observed to her maid, as she had done to Mrs. Duplex, that I had the
manner of a gentleman, and was sure, though in the situation of a servant, I
had received a gentleman's education, and that her father and mother were of
the same opinion; for that they had never remarked in any servant they had men
with, that good sense, that gallantry, that respectful attention, and that
insinuating address that marked my character; and that she was anxious to know
my history. Through this same channel I made her acquainted with every thing
concerning me; of which the reader is too well informed to need a repetition
here; and as far as I dared to do, I made Charlotte understand, which was the
name of Miss Wildman's maid, that though I ventured my life in the defense of
her mistress, and was too much her friend, to wish her in any perilous
situation again, yet I should rejoice in a second opportunity of convincing her
how much I had her safety at heart. This I foresaw would be carried to Miss
Wildman, for Charlotte had too much of the waiting-maid about her, not to take
pleasure in carrying tales backwards and forwards. Had I been butler in the
family, I should have had frequent opportunities of being in her presence; but,
in the capacity of her father's valet, I seldom could see her. Now and then she
would come into her maid's room, whilst we were at breakfast, and sit and chat
with us. The first time I saw her upon this occasion, I rose respectfully from
my seat, at which she seemed hurt. "Gabriel," says she, I am much obliged to
Charlotte for her Attention to you; any respect she shows you will be
gratefully acknowledged by me; for to you I am indebted for every thing. I
humbly told her she rated my services too high; for, independent of any
protection due to suffering innocence, such merits as Miss Wildman could boast
of, laid the strongest claim to every necessary interference. She told me, that
she frequently came into her maid's room to speak with her; but, if it
disturbed me, or put me the least out of my way, she would never enter it
again: and it was her request in future, that I should not notice her coming
in. I replied, that as a command of here is, I should obey it. At these
occasional interviews, she would be affable and familiar, and once she
condescended to tell me, that Lord B. who was the son of the Earl of A. and who
had treated her so ill, had made several applications for leave to renew his
addresses to her; but she was determined never to listen to him more. Her
heart, she said, was her own again, and she hoped, she should have sufficient
discernment and resolution never to bestow it more upon a worthless objects.
Charlotte, says she, one day, to her maid, (for Charlotte told it me again) was
I mistress of my own fortune, I don't know but I would bestow it upon Gabriel:
he appears to be a young man of such nice honor, and such virtuous sentiments,
as would be an ornament to any line of life, he may be thrown into. I assure
you, Miss, says, Charlotte, it would not be ill bestowed, for Gabriel is the
son of a gentleman, has had the best of educations, and, though now in the
capacity of a servant, has an estate of four thousand pounds a year in
expectation. In short, she made her mistress acquainted with many parts of my
history, such as I had let her into.

IT was a practice with me in every scene of life into which I was thrown, to
acquire all the information I could, respecting that scene; here then I learned
the fatigue and absurdity of a fashionable life, and the tiresome round of
dissipation attending it. My master, in one of his conversable moments, told
me, there was no satisfaction in the visits men of fashion paid to each other,
and that he had cut Cut is a fashionable term for, given it up.
it long since. Visits among the great, he said, were merely ceremonial, and
rather troublesome than otherwise; he had visited a man for seven years
together, and never once had seen him. Indeed, I heard myself, a gentleman once
say to a lady, who rated him for not calling oftener to see her, It is your
ladyship's fault entirely. -- I would come oftener, if you would not let me in.
Nay, visiting is allowed to be so much a ceremony, that I have been told of a
lady, who, having omitted to tell her porter, that she did not choose to be
seen, put her head out of window, and called out to her visitant, on knocking
at the door, "I am not at home." Frequently has my master told me, that in the
younger part of his life, he and his lady received so many invitations on the
same day, that they have been obliged to divide themselves, and go from one
house to another, showing themselves each at two or three places on the same
evening; and on my asking whether it would not have been better to have omitted
going to more places than one? He replied, No, nothing but illness (if in town)
is an excuse for non-attendance; if an invitation is once or twice unaccepted,
party will be asked no more, John, our porter, has entertained me, frequently
for a long time together, with visiting relations. He told me, when ladies have
so many visits to return, that they cannot personally pay them, it is not an
unusual thing to send the empty chair, which stopping at the end of the street,
the footman steps forward to the house, knocks gently at the door, and asks the
porter confidentially, if his lady sees company; if answered in the negative,
he knocks hard, beckons to the chairmen to come up and leaves a card; if
answered in the affirmative, no notice is taken, but they proceed to another
house. To avoid, however, this troublesome piece of business; gentlemen will
now leave their names at the door, without enquiring for the master, or
attempting to go in; and ladies will send their servants to do the same; and
the delivery of such card shall be construed as a visit made and returned. And
what is all this but farce and tiresome ceremony? the end of visiting is social
intercourse and friendly converse; but this mode of visiting, destroys that
end. A modern visitant seems to dread the meeting of a private friend, as if he
was fearful his conduct should be enquired into and censured; and, as if he
abhorred the necessity of saying a civil thing to his acquaintance. Whatever
these people may think, such conduct is disgraceful, and must arise from want
of abilities to join in general topics, or from fearing reflection, as owls
fear the daylight.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
