Contains a Description of a Lady's Dress in Fashion not much above Two
thousand Years ago. -- The Beginning of an Adventure which seems to promise a
great deal.

ARABELLA had now entered into her Seventeenth Year with the Regret of seeing
herself the Object of Admiration to a few Rustics only, who happened to see
her; when, one Sunday, making use of the Permission the Marquis sometimes
allowed her, to attend. Divine Service at the Church belonging to the Village
near which they lived, her Vanity was flattered with an Adorer not altogether
unworthy of her Notice.

This Gentleman was young, gay, handsome, and very elegantly dressed; he was
just come from London with an Intention to pass some Weeks with a Friend in
that Part of the Country; and at the time Arabella entered the Church, his
Eyes, which had wandered from one rural Fair to another, were in an Instant
fixed upon her Face. She blushed with a very becoming Modesty; and, pleased
with the unusual Appearance of so fine a Gentleman, and the particular Notice
he took of her, passed on to her Seat through a double Row of Country People,
who, with a Profusion of awkward Bows and Courtesies, expressed their Respect.

Mr. Hervey, for that was the Stranger's Name, was no less surprised at her
Beauty, than the Singularity of her Dress; and the odd Whim of being followed
into the Church by three Women-Attendants, who, as soon as she was seated, took
their Places behind her.

Her Dress, though singular, was far from being unbecoming. All the Beauties of
her Neck and Shape were set off to the greatest Advantage by the Fashion of her
Gown, which, in the Manner of a Robe, was made to sit tight to her Body; and
fastened on the Breast with a Knot of Diamonds. Her fine black Hair, hung upon
her Neck in Curls, which had so much the Appearance of being artless, that all
but her Maid, whose Employment it was to give them that Form, imagined they
were so. Her Head-dress was only a few Knots advantageously disposed, over
which she wore a white Sarsenet Hood, somewhat in the Form of a Veil, with
which she sometimes wholly covered her fair Face, when she saw herself beheld
with too much Attention.

This Veil had never appeared to her so necessary before. Mr. Hervey's eager
Glances threw her into so much Confusion, that, pulling it over her Face as
much as she was able, she remained invisible to him all the time they
afterward stayed in the Church. This Action, by which she would have had him
understand that she was displeased at his gazing on her with so little Respect,
only increased his Curiosity to know who she was.

When the Congregation was dismissed, he hastened to the Door, with an
Intention to offer her his Hand to help her to her Coach; but seeing the
magnificent Equipage that waited for her, and the Number of Servants that
attended it, he conceived a much higher Idea of her Quality than he had at
first; and, changing his Design, contented himself with only bowing to her as
she passed; and as soon as her Coach drove away, inquired of some Persons
nearest him, who she was?

These Rustics, highly delighted with the Opportunity of talking to the gay
Londoner, whom they looked upon as a very extraordinary Person, gave him all
the Intelligence they were able, concerning the Lady he inquired after; and
filled him with an inconceivable Surprise at the strange Humor of the Marquis,
who buried so beautiful a Creature in Obscurity.

At his Return home he expressed his Admiration of her in Terms that persuaded
his Friend, she had made some Impression on his Heart; and, after raillying him
a little upon this Suspicion, he assumed a more serious Air, and told him, If
he really liked Lady Bella; he thought it not impossible but he might obtain
her. The poor Girl, added he, has been kept in Confinement so long, that I
believe it would not be difficult to persuade her to free herself by Marriage.
She never had a Lover in her Life; and therefore the first Person who addresses
her has the fairest Chance for succeeding.

Mr. Hervey, though he could not persuade himself his Cousin was in Earnest when
he advised him to court the only Daughter of a Man of the Marquis's Quality,
and Heiress to his vast Estates; yet relished the Scheme, and resolved to make
some Attempt upon her before he left the Country. However, he concealed his
Design from his Cousin, not being willing to expose himself to be ridiculed, if
he did not succeed; and, turning the Advice he had given him into a Jest, left
him in the Opinion, that he thought no more of it.
