In which the Adventure goes on after the accustomed Manner.

ARABELLA, in the mean time, was wholly taken up with the Adventure, as she
called it, at Church: The Person and Dress of the Gentleman who had so
particularly gazed on her there, was so different from what she had been
accustomed to see, that she immediately concluded, he was of some distinguished
Rank. It was past a Doubt, she thought, that he was excessively in Love with
her; and as she soon expected to have some very extraordinary Proofs of his
Passion, her Thoughts were wholly employed on the Manner in which she should
receive them.

As soon as she came home, and had paid her Duty to the Marquis, she hurried to
her Chamber, to be at Liberty to indulge her agreeable Reflections; and, after
the Example of her Heroines, when any thing extraordinary happened to them,
called her favorite Woman; or, to use her own Language, her, in whom she
confided her most secret Thoughts.

Well, Lucy, said she, did you observe that Stranger who eyed us The Heroines
always speak of themselves in the Plural Number.
so heedfully Today at Church?

This Girl, notwithstanding her Country-Simplicity, knew a Compliment was
expected from her on this Occasion; and therefore replied, That she did not
wonder at the Gentleman's staring at her; for she was sure he had never seen
any body so handsome as her Ladyship before.

I have not all the Beauty you attribute to me, said Arabella, smiling a
little: And, with a very moderate Share of it, I might well fix the Attention
of a Person who seemed to be not overmuch pleased with the Objects about him:
However, pursued she, assuming a more serious Air, if this Stranger be weak
enough to entertain any Sentiments more than indifferent for me; I charge you,
upon Pain of my Displeasure, do not be accessory to the Conveying his
presumptuous Thoughts to me either by Letters or Messages; nor suffer him to
corrupt your Fidelity with the Presents he will very probably offer you.

Lucy, to whom this Speech first gave a Hint of what she ought to expect from
her Lady's Lovers, finding herself of more Importance than she imagined, was so
pleased at the Prospect which opened to her, that it was with some Hesitation
she promised to obey her Orders.

Arabella, however, was satisfied with her Assurances of observing her
Directions; and dismissed her from her Presence, not without an Apprehension of
being too well obeyed.

A whole Week being elapsed without meeting with the Importunities she
expected, she could hardly conceal her Surprise at so mortifying a
Disappointment; and frequently interrogated Lucy, concerning any Attempts the
Stranger had made on her Fidelity; but the Answers she received, only increased
her Discontent, as they convinced her, her Charms had not had the Effect she
imagined.

Mr. Hervey, however, had been all this time employed in thinking of some Means
to get acquainted with the Marquis; for, being possessed with an extraordinary
Opinion of his Wit, and personal Accomplishments, he did not fear making some
Impression on the Heart of the young Lady; provided he could have an
Opportunity of conversing with her.

His Cousin's Advice was continually in his Mind, and flattered his Vanity with
the most agreeable Hopes: But the Marquis's Fondness for Solitude, and that
Haughtiness which was natural to him, rendered him so difficult of Access, that
Hervey, from the Intelligence he received of his Humor, despaired of being
able to prosecute his Scheme; when, meeting with a young Farmer in one of his
Evening-Walks, and entering into Conversation with him upon several Country
Subjects, the Discourse at last turned upon the Marquis of -- whose fine House
and Gardens were within their View; upon which the young Fellow informed him,
he was Brother to a young Woman that attended the Lady Arabella; and, being
fond of lengthening out the Conversation with so fine a Gentleman, gave him,
without being desired, the domestic History of the whole Family, as he had
received it from Lucy, who was the Sister he mentioned.

Hervey, excessively delighted at this accidental Meeting with a Person so
capable of serving his Defign, affected a great Desire of being better
acquainted with him; and, under Pretense of acquiring some Knowledge in rural
Affairs, accustomed himself to call so often at William's Farm, that at last he
met with the Person whom the Hopes of seeing had so often carried him thither.

Lucy, the Moment she saw him enter, knowing him again, blushed at the
Remembrance of the Discourse which had passed between her Lady and herself
concerning him; and was not at all surprised at the Endeavors he used to speak
to her apart: But, as soon as he began a Conversation concerning Arabella, she
interrupted him by saying, I know, Sir, that you are distractedly in Love with
my Lady; but she has forbid me to receive any Letters or Messages from you; and
therefore I beg you will not offer to bribe me; for I dare not disobey her.

Mr. Hervey was at first so astonished at her Speech, that he knew not what to
think of it; but, after a little Reflection, attributing to an Excess of
awkward Cunning what, in Reality, was an Effect of her Simplicity, he resolved
to make use of the Hint she had given him; and, presenting her with a Couple of
Guineas, entreated her to venture displeasing her Lady, by bearing a Letter
from him; promising to reward her better, if she succeeded.

Lucy made some Difficulty to comply; but, not being able absolutely to refuse
the first Bribe that ever was offered to her, she, after some Entreaties,
consented to take the Letter; and, receiving the Money he presented her, left
him at Liberty to write, after she had got her Brother to furnish him with
Materials for that Purpose.
