In which one would imagine the Adventure concluded, but for a Promise, that
something else is to come.

LUCY now began to think there was something more, than she imagined, in this
Affair. Mr. Hervey indeed, in her Opinion, had seemed to be very far from
having any Design to attempt his own Life; but her Lady, she thought, could not
possibly be mistaken; and therefore she resolved to carry her Message to him
immediately, though it was then late in the Evening.

Accordingly she went to her Brother's, where she had some Hope of meeting with
him; but not finding him there, she obliged him to go to the House where he
lived, and tell him she desired to speak with him.

William, being let into the Secret of his Sister's frequent Meetings with Mr.
Hervey, imagined she had some agreeable News to acquaint him with; and
therefore ran immediately to his Relation's House, which was but at a small
Distance; but he was told Mr. Hervey was in Bed, very much indisposed, and
could not be seen.

This News put Lucy in a terrible Fright: She told her Apprehensions to her
Brother; which being such as her Lady had put into her Head, and were now
confirmed by Mr. Hervey's Illness, the young Farmer stood amazed, not being
able to comprehend her Meaning; and she, without staying to explain herself any
further, went home to the Castle, and told her Lady, That what she feared was
come to pass; the Gentleman would certainly die; for he was very ill in Bed.

This being no more than what Arabella expected, she discovered no Surprise;
but only asked Lucy, If she had delivered her Message to him?

Would you have me, Madam, replied she, go to his House? I am afraid the
Marquis will hear of it.

My Father, replied Arabella, can never be offended with me for doing a
charitable Action.

Ah! Madam, interrupted Lucy, let me go then immediately, for fear the poor
Gentleman should grow worse.

If he be sick almost to Death, resumed Arabella, he will recover, if I command
him to do so: When did you hear of a Lover dying through Despair, when his
Mistress let him know it was her Pleasure he should live? But as it will not be
altogether so proper for you to go to his House, as it may be suspected you
come from me; I Will write a few Lines, which you shall copy, and your Brother
may carry them to him Tomorrow, and I Will engage he shall be well in a few
Hours.

Saying this, she went into her Closet, and, having written a short Note, made
Lucy write it over again. It was as follows:

Lucy, To the Unfortunate Lover of her Lady.
MY Lady, who is the most generous Person in the World, has commanded me to
tell you, that, presumptuous as you are, she does not desire your Death; nay
more, she commands you to live, and permits you, in case you obey her, to hope
for her Pardon, provided you keep within the Bounds she prescribes to you.

Adieu.

This Letter Lucy copied, and Arabella, examining it again, thought it rather
too kind; and, seeming desirous of making some Alteration in it, Lucy, who was
extremely anxious for Mr. Hervey's Life, fearing lest she should alter it in
such a manner, that the Gentleman might be at Liberty to die, if he chose it,
conjured her Lady in such pressing Terms to let it remain as it was, that
Arabella suffered herself to be prevailed upon by her Entreaties; and,
remembering that it was not uncommon for the Ladies in Romances to relax a
little in their Severity through the Remonstrances of their Women, told her,
with an enchanting Smile, that she would grant her Desire; and went to Bed with
that pleasing Satisfaction, which every generous Mind experiences at the
Consciousness of having done some very benevolent Action.

In the Morning, this life-restoring Billet was dispatched by Lucy to her
Brother, enclosed in one to him, charging him to carry it to the sick Gentleman
immediately.

William, having a strong Curiosity to see what his Sister had written,
ventured to open it; and, not being able to imagine Lady Bella had really given
her Orders to write what appeared to him the most unintelligible Stuff in the
World, resolved to suppress this Letter till he had questioned her a little
concerning it.

A few Hours after, Mr. Hervey, who expected to meet Lucy at her Brother's,
came in. His Illness having been only a violent Headache, to which he was
subject, being now quite off, he remembered the Appointment he had made; but,
having waited some time, and she not coming, he returned again to his Cousin's,
leaving word for her, that he would see her the next Day.

Scarce was he gone out, when Lucy, who longed to know what Effect her Letter
had produced in his Health, came in; and eagerly inquiring of her Brother how
Mr. Hervey was, received for Answer, that he had been there a Moment before she
came.

Well, cried she, clasping her Hands together, with Surprise, my Lady said, her
Letter would cure him, if he was ever so sick; but I did not imagine he would
have been well enough to come abroad so soon.

Your Lady! interrupted William, why was it not yourself that wrote that Letter
you gave to me?

No, truly, Brother, resumed she: How was it possible I should write so fine a
Letter? My Lady made every Word of it, and I only wrote it after her.

William, hearing this, would not own the Indiscretion he now thought he had
been guilty of, in keeping the Letter; but suffered his Sister to return to her
Lady, in the Belief that he had delivered it, resolving, when he saw her next,
to say he had lost it; for he knew not what Excuse to make to Mr. Hervey for
not giving it him when he saw him.

Arabella received the Account of her Lover's Recovery as a Thing she was
absolutely sure of before; and thinking she had now done all that could be
expected from her Compassion, resumed her usual Severity, and commanded Lucy to
mention him no more. If he loves me with that Purity he ought to do, pursued
she, he will cease to importune me any further: And though his Passion be ever
so violent, his Respect and Submission to my Commands will oblige him to
Silence. The Obedience he has already shown, in recovering at the first
Intimation I gave, that it was my Will he should do so, convinces me, I need
not apprehend he will renew his Follies to displease me.

Lucy, who found by this Discourse of her Lady's, that her Commission was at an
End with regard to Mr. Hervey, followed her Directions so exactly, that she not
only spoke no more of him to her, but also, in order to avoid him, neglected to
go to her Brother's.

His Impatience at not seeing her made him prevail upon her Brother to go the
Castle, and entreat her to give him another Interview: But Lucy positively
refused; and, to make a Merit with her Lady of her Obedience, informed her what
he had requested.

Arabella, resenting a Boldness which argued so little Respect to her Commands,
began now to repent of the Compassion she had shown him; and, commending Lucy
for what she had done, bid her tell the insolent Unknown, if he ever sent to
her again, that she was resolved never to pardon the Contempt he had shown for
her Orders.

Mr. Hervey, finding himself deserted by Lucy, resolved to give over his
Attempts, congratulating himself for his Discretion in not acquainting his
Cousin with what he had already done: His Heart not being very much engaged, he
found no great Difficulty in consoling himself for his bad Success. In a few
Days he thought of Lady Bella no more, than if he had never seen her; but an
Accident bringing her again in his Way, he could not resist the Inclination he
felt to speak to her; and by that means drew upon himself a very sensible
Mortification.
