In which a logical Argument is unseasonably interrupted.

THE Marquis was also extremely uneasy at her Obstinacy: He desired nothing
more ardently than to marry her to his Nephew; but he could not resolve to
force her Consent; and, however determined he appeared to her, yet, in Reality,
he intended only to use Persuasions to effect what he desired; and, from the
natural Sweetness of her Temper, he was sometimes not without Hopes, that she
might, at last, be prevailed upon to comply.

His Nephew's Return restored him to Part of his usual Tranquillity: After he
had gently chid him for suffering himself to be so far transported with his
Resentment at the little Humors of a Lady, as to leave his House, without
acquainting him, he bid him go to Arabella, and endeavor to make his Peace
with her.

Mr. Glanville accordingly went to her Apartment, resolving to oblige her to
come to some Explanation with him concerning the Offense she complained of; but
that fair incensed Lady, who had taken Shelter in her Closet, ordered Lucy to
tell him she was indisposed, and could not see him.

Glanville, however, comforted himself for this Disappointment by the Hopes of
seeing her at Supper; and accordingly she came, when the Supper-Bell rung, and,
making a very cool Compliment to her Cousin, placed herself at Table: The soft
Languor that appeared in her Eyes, gave such an additional Charm to one of the
loveliest Faces in the World, that Glanville, who sat opposite to her, could
not help gazing on her with a very particular Attention; he often spoke to her,
and asked her trifling Questions, for the sake of hearing the Sound of her
Voice, which Sorrow had made inchantingly sweet.

When Supper was over, she would have retired; but the Marquis desired her to
stay and entertain her Cousin, while he went to look over some Dispatches he
had received from London.

Arabella blushed with Anger at this Command; but, not daring to disobey, she
kept her Eyes fixed on the Ground, as if she dreaded to hear something that
would displease her.

Well, Cousin, said Glanville, though you desire to have no Empire over so
unworthy a Subject as myself, yet I hope you are not displeased at my
returning, in Obedience to your Commands.

Since I am not allowed any Will of my own, said she, sighing, it matters not
whether I am pleased, or displeased; nor is it of any Consequence to you to
know.

Indeed but it is, Lady Bella, interrupted he; for if I knew how to please you,
I would never, if I could help it, offend: Therefore, I beg you, tell me how I
have disobliged you; for, certainly, you have treated me as harshly as if I had
been guilty of some very terrible Offense.

You had the Boldness, said she, to talk to me of Love; and you well know that
Persons of my Sex and Quality are not permitted to listen to such Discourses;
and if, for that Offense, I banished you my Presence, I did no more than
Decency required of me; and which I would yet do, were I Mistress of my own
Actions.

But is it possible, Cousin, said Glanville, that you can be angry with any one
for loving you? Is that a Crime of so high a Nature as to merit an eternal
Banishment from your Presence?

Without telling you, said Arabella, blushing, whether I am angry at being
loved, it is sufficient you know, that I will not pardon the Man who shall have
the Presumption to tell me he loves me.

But, Madam, interrupted Glanville, if the Person who tells you he loves you,
be of a Rank not beneath you, I conceive you are not at all injured by the
favorable Sentiments he feels for you; and, though you are not disposed to make
any Returns to his Passion, yet you are certainly obliged to him for his good
Opinion.

Since Love is not voluntary, replied Arabella, I am not obliged to any Person
for loving me; for, questionless, if he could help it, he would.

If it is not a voluntary Favor, interrupted Glanville, it is not a voluntary
Offense; and, if you do not think yourself obliged by the one, neither are you
at Liberty to be offended with the other.

The Question, said Arabella, is not whether I ought to be offended at being
loved, but whether it is not an Offense to be told I am so.

If there is nothing criminal in the Passion itself, Madam, resumed Glanville,
certainly there can be no Crime in declaring it.

However specious your Arguments may appear, interrupted Arabella, I am
persuaded it is an unpardonable Crime to tell a Lady you love her; and, though I
had nothing else to plead, yet the Authority of Custom is sufficient to prove
it.

Custom, Lady Bella, said Glanville, smiling* is wholly on my Side; for the
Ladies are so far from being displeased at the Addresses of their Lovers, that
their chiefest Care is to gain them, and their greatest Triumph to hear them
talk of their Passion: So, Madam, I hope you will allow that Argument has no
Force.

I don't know, answered Arabella, what Sort of Ladies there are who allow such
unbecoming Liberties, but I am certain, that Statira, Parisatis, Clelia,
Mandana, and all the illustrious Heroines of Antiquity, whom it is a Glory to
resemble, would never admit of such Discourses.

Ah for Heaven's sake, Cousin, interrupted Glanville, endeavoring to stifle a
Laugh, do not suffer yourself to be governed by such antiquated Maxims! The
World is quite different to what it was in those Days; and the Ladies in this
Age would as soon follow the Fashions of the Greek and Roman Ladies, as mimick
their Manners; and I believe they would become one as ill as the other.

I am sure, replied Arabella, the World is not more virtuous now than it was in
their Days, and there is good Reason to believe it is not much wiser; and I
don't see why the Manners of this Age are to be preferred to those of former
ones, unless they are wiser and better: However, I cannot be persuaded, that
Things are as you say, and that when I am a little better acquainted with the
World, I shall find as many Persons who resemble Oroondates, Artaxerxes, and
the illustrious Lovers of Clelia, as those who are like Tiribases, Artaxes, and
the presuming and insolent Glanville.

By the Epithets you give me Madam, said Glanville, I find you have placed me
in very bad Company: But pray, Madam, if the illustrious Lover of Clelia had
never discovered his Passion, how would the World have come to the Knowledge of
it?

He did not discover his Passion, Sir, resumed Arabella, till, by the Services
he did the noble Clelius, and his incomparable Daughter, he could plead some
Title to their Esteem: He several times preserved the Life of that renowned
Roman; delivered the beautiful Clelia when she was a Captive; and, in fine,
conferred so many Obligations upon them, and all their Friends, as he might
well expect to be pardoned by the divine Clelia for daring to love her.
Nevertheless, she used him very harshly, when he first declared his Passion,
and banished him also from her Presence; and it was a long time before she
could prevail upon herself to compassionate his Sufferings.

The Marquis coming in interrupted Arabella; upon which she took Occasion to
retire; leaving Glanville more captivated with her than ever.

He found her Usage of him was grounded upon Examples she thought it her Duty
to follow; and, strange as her Notions of Life appeared, yet they were
supported with so much Wit and Delicacy, that he could not help admiring her,
while he foresaw, the Oddity of her Humor would throw innumerable Difficulties
in his Way, before he should be able to obtain her.

However, as he was really passionately in Love with her, he resolved to
accommodate himself, as much as possible, to her Taste, and endeavor to gain
her Heart by a Behavior most agreeable to her: He therefore assumed an Air of
great Distance and Respect; never mentioned his Affection, nor the Intentions
of her Father in his Favor; and the Marquis, observing his Daughter conversed
with him with less Reluctance than usual, leaving to Time, and the Merit of his
Nephew, to dispose her to comply with his Desires, resolved not to interpose
his Authority in an Affair upon which her own Happiness so much depended.
