In which the Reader will find a Specimen of the true Pathetic, in a Speech of
Oroondates. -- The Adventure of the Books.

ARABELLA saw the Change in her Cousin's Behavior with a great deal of
Satisfaction; for she did not doubt but his Passion was as strong as ever; but
that he forbore, through Respect, from entertaining her with any Expressions of
it: Therefore she now conversed with him with the greatest Sweetness and
Complaisance: She would walk with him for several Hours in the Garden, leaning
upon his Arm; and charmed him to the last Degree of Admiration by the agreeable
Sallies of her Wit, and her fine Reasoning upon every Subject he proposed.

It was with the greatest Difficulty he restrained himself from telling her a
Thousand times a Day that he loved her to Excess, and conjuring her to give her
Consent to her Father's Designs in his Favor: But, though he could get over his
Fears of offending her, yet it was impossible to express any Sentiments of this
Nature to her, without having her Women Witnesses of his Discourse; for, when
he walked with her in the Garden, Lucy, and another Attendant, always followed
her: If he sat with her in her own Chamber, her Women were always at one End of
it: And, when they were both in the Marquis's Apartment, where her Women did
not follow her, poor Glanville found himself embarrassed by his Presence; for,
conceiving his Nephew had Opportunities enough of talking to his Daughter in
private, he always partook of their Conversation.

He passed some Weeks in this Manner, extremely chagrined at the little
Progress he made; and was beginning to be heartily weary of the Constraint he
laid upon himself, when Arabella, one Day, furnished him, without designing it,
with an Opportunity of talking to her on the Subject he wished for.

When I reflect, said she, laughing, upon the Difference there was between us
some Days ago, and the Familiarity in which we live at present, I cannot
imagine by what means you have arrived to a good Fortune you had so little
Reason to expect; for, in fine, you have given me no Signs of Repentance for
the Fault you committed, which moved me to banish you; and I am not certain
whether, in conversing with you in the manner I do, I give you not as much
Reason to find Fault with my too great Easiness, as you did me to be displeased
with your Presumption.

Since, returned Glanville, I have not persisted in the Commission of those
Faults which displeased you, what greater Signs of Repentance can you desire,
than this Reformation in my Behavior?

But Repentance ought to precede Reformation, replied Arabella; otherwise,
there is great room to suspect it is only feigned: And a sincere Repentance
shows itself in such visible Marks, that one can hardly be deceived in that
which is genuine. I have read of many indiscreet Lovers, who not succeeding in
their Addresses, have pretended to repent, and acted as you do; that is,
without giving any Signs of Contrition for the Fault they had committed, have
eat and slept well, never lost their Color, or grew one bit thinner, by their
Sorrow; but contented themselves with saying they repented; and, without
changing thetr Disposition to renew their Fault, only concealed their
Intention, for fear of losing any favorable Opportunity of committing it
again: But true Repentance, as I was saying, not only produces Reformation, but
the Person who is possessed of it voluntarily punishes himself for the Faults
he has been guilty of. Thus Mazares, deeply repenting of the Crime his Passion
for the divine Manda^a had forced him to commit; as a Punishment, obliged
himself to follow the Fortune of his glorious Rival; obey all his Commands;
and, fighting under his Banners, assist him to gain the Possession of his
adored Mistress. Such a glorious Instance of Self-denial was, indeed, a
sufficient Proof of his Repentance; and infinitely more convincing than the
Silence he imposed upon himself with respect to his Passion.

Oroondates, to punish himself for his Presumption, in daring to tell the
admirable Statira, that he loved her, resolved to die, to expiate his Crime;
and, doubtless, would have done so, if his fair Mistress, at the Entreaty of
her Brother, had not commanded him to live.

But pray, Lady Bella, interrupted Glanville, were not these Gentlemen happy at
last in the Possession of their Mistresses?

Doubtless they were, Sir, resumed she; but it was not till after numberless
Misfortunes, infinite Services, and many dangerous Adventures, in which their
Fidelity was put to the strongest Trials imaginable.

I am glad, however, said Glanville, that the Ladies were not insensible; for,
since you do not disapprove of their Compassion for their Lovers, it is to be
hoped you will not be always as inexorable as you are now.

When I shall be so fortunate, interrupted she, to meet with a Lover who shall
have as pure and perfect a Passion for me, as Oroondates had for Statira; and
give me as many glorious Proofs of his Constancy and Affection, doubtless I
shall not be ungrateful: But, since I have not the Merits of Statira, I ought
not to pretend to her good Fortune; and shall be very well contented if I
escape the Persecutions which Persons of my Sex, who are not frightfully ugly,
are always exposed to, without hoping to inspire such a Passion as that of
Oroondates.

I should be glad to be better acquainted with the Actions of this happy Lover,
Madam, said Glanville; that, forming myself upon his Example, I may hope to
please a Lady as worthy of my Regard as Statira was of his.

For Heaven's sake, Cousin, resumed Arabella, laughing, how have you spent your
Time; and to what Studies have you devoted all your Hours, that you could find
none to spare for the Perusal of Books from which all useful Knowledge may be
drawn; which give us the most shining Examples of Generosity, Courage, Virtue,
and Love; which regulate our Actions, form our Manners, and inspire us with a
noble Desire of emulating those great, heroic, and virtuous Actions, which made
those Persons so glorious in their Age, and so worthy Imitation in ours?
However, as it is never too late to improve, suffer me to recommend to you the
reading of these Books, which will soon make you discover the Improprieties you
have been guilty of; and will, probably, induce you to avoid them for the
future.

I shall certainly read them, if you desire it, said Glanville; and I have so
great an Inclination to be agreeable to you, that I shall embrace every
Opportunity of becoming so; and will therefore take my Instructions from these
Books, if you think proper, or from yourself* which, indeed, will be the
quickest Method of teaching me.

Arabella having ordered one of her Women to bring Cleopatra, Cassandra,
Clelia, and the Grand Cyrus, from her Library, Glanville no sooner saw the Girl
return, sinking under the Weight of those voluminous Romances, but he began to
tremble at the Apprehension of his Cousin laying her Commands upon him to read
them; and repented of his Complaisance, which exposed him to the cruel
Necessity of performing what to him appeared an Herculean Labor, or else
incurring her Anger by his Refusal.

Arabella, making her Women place the Books upon a Table before her, opened
them, one after another, with Eyes sparkling with Delight; while Glanville sat
rapt in Admiration at the Sight of so many huge Folio's, written, as he
conceived, upon the most trifling Subjects imaginable.

I have chosen out these few, said Arabella (not observing his Consternation)
from a great many others, which compose the most valuable Part of my Library;
and, by that time you have gone through these, I imagine you will be considerably
improved.

Certainly, Madam, replied Glanville, turning over the Leaves in great
Confusion, one may, as you say, be greatly improved; for these Books contain a
great deal: And, looking over a Page of Cassandra, without any Design, read
these Words, which were Part of Oroondates's Soliloquy when he received a cruel
Sentence from Statira:

Ah cruel! says this miserable Lover, and what have I done to merit it? Examine
the Nature of my Offense, and you will see I am not so guilty, but that my
Death may free me from Part of that Severity: Shall your Hatred last longer
than my Life? And can you detest a Soul that forsakes its Body only to obey
you? No, no, you are not so hard-hearted; that Satisfaction will, doubtless,
content you: And, when I shall cease to be, doubtless I shall cease to be
odious to you.

Upon my Soul, said Glanville, stifling a Laugh with great Difficulty, I cannot
help blaming the Lady this sorrowful Lover complains of, for her great Cruelty;
for here he gives one Reason to suspect, that she will not even be contented
with his dying in Obedience to her Commands, but will hate him after Death; an
Impiety quite inexcusable in a Christian!

You condemn this illustrious Princess with very little Reason, interrupted
Arabella, smiling at his Mistake; for, besides that she was not a Christian,
and ignorant of those Divine Maxims of Charity and Forgiveness, which
Christians, by their Profession, are obliged to practice, she was very far from
desiring the Death of Oroondates; for, if you will take the Pains to read the
succeeding Passages, you will find that she expresses herself in the most
obliging Manner in the World; for when Oroondates tells her he would live, if
she would consent he should, the Princess most sweetly replies, I not only
consent, but also entreat it; and, if I have any Power, command it. However,
lest you should fall into the other Extreme, and blame this great Princess for
her Easiness (as you before condemned her for her Cruelty), it is necessary you
should know how she was induced to this favorable Behavior to her Lover:
Therefore pray read the whole Transaction. Stay! here it begins, continued she;
turning over a good many Pages, and marking where he should begin to read.

Glanville, having no great Stomach to the Task, endeavored to evade it, by
entreating his Cousin to relate the Passages she desired he should be
acquainted with: But she declining it, he was obliged to obey; and began to
read where she directed him: And, to leave him at Liberty to read with the
greater Attention, she left him, and went to a Window at another End of the
Chamber.

Mr. Glanville, who was not willing to displease her, examined the Task she had
set him, resolving, if it was not a very hard one, to comply; but, counting the
Pages, he was quite terrified at the Number, and could not prevail upon himself
to read them: Therefore, glancing them over, he pretended to be deeply engaged
in reading, when, in Reality, he was contemplating the surprising Effect these
Books had produced in the Mind of his Cousin; who, had she been untainted with
the ridiculous Whims they created in her Imagination, was, in his Opinion, one
of the most accomplished Ladies in the World.

When he had sat long enough to make her believe he had read what she had
desired, he rose up, and, joining her at the Window, began to talk of the
Pleasantness of the Evening, instead of the Rigor of Statira.

Arabella colored with Vexation at his extreme Indifference in a Matter which
was of such prodigious Consequence, in her Opinion; but disdaining to put him
in mind of his Rudeness, in quitting a Subject they had not thoroughly
discussed, and which she had taken so much Pains to make him comprehend, she
continued silent; and would not condescend to afford him an Answer to any thing
he said.

Glanville, by her Silence and Frowns, was made sensible of his Fault; and, to
repair it, began to talk of the inexorable Statira, though, indeed, he did not
well know what to say.

Arabella, clearing up a little, did not disdain to answer him upon her
favorite Topic: I knew, said she, you would be ready to blame this Princess
equally for her Rigor and her Kindness; but it must be remembered that, what
she did in Favor of Oroondates, was wholly owing to the Generosity of
Artaxerxes.

Here she stopped, expecting Glanville to give his Opinion; who, strangely
puzzled, replied at random, To be sure, Madam, he was a very generous Rival.

Rival! cried Arabella; Artaxerxes the Rival of Oroondates! Why certainly you
have lost your Wits: He was Statira's Brother; and it was to his Mediation that
Oroondates, or Orontes, owed his Happiness.

Certainly, Madam, replied Glanville, it was very generous in Artaxerxes, as he
was Brother to Statira, to interpose in the Behalf of an unfortunate Lover; and
both Oroondates, and Orontes, were extremely obliged to him.

Orontes, replied Arabella, was more obliged to him than Oroondates; since the
Quality of Orontes was infinitely below that of Oroondates.

But, Madam, interrupted Glanville (extremely pleased at his having so well got
over the Difficulty he had been in), which of these two Lovers did Statira make
happy?

This unlucky Question immediately informed Arabella, that she had been all
this time the Dupe of her Cousin; who, if he had read a single Page, would have
known that Orontes and Oroondates was the same Person; the Name of Orontes
being assumed by Oroondates, to conceal his real Name and Quality.

The Shame and Rage she conceived at so glaring a Proof of his Disrespect, and
the Ridicule to which she had exposed herself, were so great, that she could
not find Words severe enough to express her Resentment; but, protesting that no
Consideration whatever should oblige her to converse with him again, she
ordered him instantly to quit her Chamber; and assured him, if he ever
attempted to approach her again, she would submit to the most terrible Effects
of her Father's Resentment, rather than be obliged to see a Person who had, by
his unworthy Behavior, made himself her Scorn and Aversion.

Glanville, who saw himself going to be discarded a second time, attempted,
with great Submission, to move her to recall her cruel Sentence; but Arabella,
bursting into Tears, complained so pathetically of the Cruelty of her Destiny,
in exposing her to the hated Importunities of a Man she despised, and whose
Presence was so insupportable, that Glanville, thinking it best to let her Rage
evaporate before he attempted to pacify her, quitted her Chamber; cursing
Statira and Orontes a thousand times, and loading the Authors of those Books
with all the Imprecations his Rage could suggest.
