Which contains some common Occurrences, but placed in a new Light.

ARABELLA, in a few Days, leaving her Chamber, had so many Opportunities of
charming her Uncle by her Conversation, which, when it did not turn upon any
Incident in her Romances, was perfectly fine, easy, and entertaining, that he
declared, he should quit the Castle with great Regret; and endeavored to
persuade her to accompany him to Town: But Arabella, who was determined to pass
the Year of her Mourning, in the Retirement she had always lived in, absolutely
refused, strong as her Curiosity was, to see London.

Mr. Glanville secretly rejoiced at this Resolution, though he seemed desirous of
making her change it; but she was unalterable; and, therefore, the Baronet did
not think proper to press her any more.

Her Father's Will being read to her, she seemed extremely pleased with the
Articles in favor of Mr. Glanville, wishing him Joy of the Estate that was
bequeathed to him, with a most enchanting Sweetness.

Mr. Glanville sighed, and cast his Eyes on the Ground, as he returned her
Compliment, with a very low Bow; and Sir Charles, observing his Confusion, told
Arabella, that he thought it was a very bad Omen for his Son, to wish him Joy
of an Estate, which he could not come to the Possession of, but by a very great
Misfortune.

Arabella, understanding his Meaning, blushed; and, willing to change the
Discourse, proceeded to consult her Uncle upon the Regulation of her House.
Besides the Legacies her Father had bequeathed to his Servants, those, who were
more immediately about his Person, she desired, might have their Salaries
continued to them: She made no other Alteration, than discharging these
Attendants, retaining all the others; and submitting to her Uncle the
Management of her Estates, receiving the Allowance he thought proper to assign
her, till she was of Age, of which she wanted three Years.

Every Thing being settled, Sir Charles prepared to return to Town. Mr.
Glanville, who desired nothing so much as to stay some time longer with his
Cousin in her Solitude, got his Father to entreat that Favor for him of
Arabella: But she represented to her Uncle the Impropriety of a young
Gentleman's staying with her, in her House, now her Father was dead, in a
manner so genteel and convincing, that Sir Charles could press it no further;
and all that Mr. Glanville could obtain, was, a Permission to visit her some
time after, provided he could prevail upon his Sister, Miss Charlotte
Glanville, to accompany him.

The Day of their Departure being come, Sir Charles took his Leave of his
charming Niece, with many Expressions of Esteem and Affection; and Mr.
Glanville appeared so concerned, that Arabella could not help observing it; and
bade him adieu with great Sweetness.

When they were gone, she found her Time hung heavy upon her Hands; her Father
was continually in her Thoughts, and made her extremely melancholy: She
recollected the many agreeable Conversations she had had with Glanville; and
wished it had been consistent with Decency to have detained him. Her Books
being the only Amusement she had left, she applied herself to reading with more
Eagerness than ever; but, notwithstanding the Delight she took in this
Employment, she had so many Hours of Solitude and Melancholy to indulge the
Remembrance of her Father in, that she was very far from being happy.

As she wished for nothing more passionately than an agreeable Companion of her
own Sex and Rank, an Accident threw a Person in her Way, who, for some Days,
afforded her a little Amusement. Stepping one Day out of her Coach, to go into
Church, she saw a young Lady enter, accompanied with a middle-aged Woman, who
seemed to be an Attendant. As Arabella had never seen any one, above the Rank
of a Gentleman Farmer's Daughter, in this Church, her Attention was immediately
engaged by the Appearance of this Stranger, who was very magnificently dressed:
Though she did not seem to be more than eighteen Years of Age, her Statute was
above the ordinary Size of Women; and, being rather too plump to be delicate,
her Mien was so majestic, and such an Air of Grandeur was diffused over her
whole Person, joined to the Charms of a very lovely Face, that Arabella could
hardly help thinking she saw the beautiful Candace before her, who, by
Scudery's Description, very much resembled this Fair one.

Arabella, having heedfully observed her Looks, thought she saw a great
Appearance of Melancholy in her Eyes, which filled her with a generous Concern
for the Misfortunes of so admirable a Person; but, the Service beginning, she
was not at Liberty to indulge her Reflections upon this Occasion, as she never
suffered any Thoughts, but those of Religion, to intrude upon her Mind, during
these pious Rites.

As she was going out of Church she observed the young Lady, attended only with
the Woman who came with her, preparing to walk home, and therefore stepped
forward, and, saluting her with a Grace peculiar to herself, entreated her to
come into her Coach, and give her the Pleasure of setting her down at her own
House: So obliging an Offer from a Person of Arabella's Rank could not fail of
being received with great Respect by the young Lady, who was not ignorant of
all the Forms of Good-breeding; and, accepting her Invitation, she stepped into
the Coach; Arabella obliging her Woman to come in also, for whom, as she had
that Day only Lucy along with her, there was Room enough.

As they were going home, Arabella, who longed to be better acquainted,
entreated the fair Stranger, as she called her, to go to the Castle, and spend
the Day with her; and she consenting, they passed by the House where she
lodged, and alighted at the Castle, where Arabella welcomed her, with the most
obliging Expressions of Civility and Respect. The young Lady, though perfectly
versed in the Modes of Town-Breeding, and nothing-meaning Ceremony, was at a
Loss how to make proper Returns to the Civilities of Arabella: The native
Elegance and Simplicity of her Manners were accompanied with so much real
Benevolence of Heart, such insinuating Tenderness, and Graces so irresistible,
that she was quite oppressed with them; and, having spent most of her Time
between her Toilet and Quadrille, was so little qualified for partaking a
Conversation so refined as Arabella's, that her Discourse appeared quite
tedious to her, since it was neither upon Fashions, Assemblies, Cards, or
Scandal.

Her Silence, and that Absence of Mind, which she betrayed, made Arabella
conclude, she was under some very great Affliction; and, to amuse her after
Dinner, led her into the Gardens, supposing a Person, whose Uneasiness, as she
did not doubt, proceeded from Love, would be pleased with the Sight of Groves
and Streams, and be tempted to disclose her Misfortunes, while they wandered in
that agreeable Privacy. In this, however, she was deceived; for, though the young
Lady sighed several times, yet, when she did speak, it was only of indifferent
Things, and not at all in the manner of an afflicted Heroine.

After observing upon a thousand Trifles, she told Arabella at last, to whom
she was desirous of making known her Alliance to Quality, that these Gardens
were extremely like those of her Father's-in-Law, the Duke of -- at --

At this Intimation, she expected Arabella would be extremely surprised; but
that Lady, whose Thoughts were always familiarized to Objects of Grandeur, and
would not have been astonished, if she had understood her Guest was the
Daughter of a King, appeared so little moved, that the Lady was piqued by her
Indifference; and, after a few Moment's Silence, began to mention going away.

Arabella, who was desirous of retaining her a few Days, entreated her so
obligingly to favor her with her Company, for some time, in her Solitude, that
the other could not refuse; and, dispatching her Woman to the House where she
lodged, to inform them of her Stay at the Castle, would have dispensed with her
coming again to attend her, had not Arabella insisted upon the contrary.

The Reserve, which the Daughter-in-Law of the Duke of -- still continued to
maintain, notwithstanding the repeated Expressions of Friendship Arabella used
to her, increased her Curiosity to know her Adventures, which she was extremely
surprised, she had never offered to relate; but, attributing her Silence, upon
this Head, to her Modesty, she was resolved, as was the Custom in those Cases,
to oblige her Woman, who, she presumed, was her Confidante, to relate, her
Lady's History to her; and sending for this Person one Day, when she was alone,
to attend her in her Closet, she gave Orders to her Women, if the fair Stranger
came to inquire for her, to say she was then busy, but would wait on her as
soon as possible.

After this Caution, she ordered Mrs. Morris to be admitted; and, obliging her
to sit down, told her, she sent for her in order to hear from her the History
of her Lady's Life, which she was extremely desirous of knowing.

Mrs. Morris, who was a Person of Sense, and had seen the World, was extremely
surprised at this Request of Arabella, which was quite contrary to the Laws of
Good-breeding; and, as she thought, betrayed a great deal of impertinent
Curiosity: She could not tell how to account for the free Manner in which she
desired her to give up her Lady's Secrets, which, indeed, were not of a Nature
to be told; and appeared so much confused, that Arabella took Notice of it;
and, supposing it was her Bashfulness which caused her Embarrassment, she
endeavored to re-assure her by the most affable Behavior imaginable.

Mrs. Morris, who was not capable of much Fidelity for her Lady, being but
lately taken into her Service, and not extremely fond of her, thought she had
now a fine Opportunity of recommending herself to Arabella, by telling her all
she knew of Miss Groves, for that was her Name; and, therefore, told her, since
she was pleased to command it, she would give her what Account she was able of
her Lady; but entreated her to be secret, because it was of great Consequence
to her, that her Affairs should not be known.

I always imagined, said Arabella, that your beautiful Mistress had some
particular Reason for not making herself known, and for coming in this private
Manner into this Part of the Country: You may assure yourself therefore, that I
will protect her as far as I am able, and offer her all the Assistance in my
Power to give her: Therefore you may acquaint me with her Adventures, without
being apprehensive of a Discovery that would be prejudicial to her.

Mrs. Morris, who had been much better pleased with the Assurances of a Reward
for the Intelligence she was going to give her, looked a little foolish at
these fine Promises, in which she had no Share; and Arabella, supposing she was
endeavoring to recollect all the Passages of her Lady's Life, told her, She
need not give herself the Trouble to acquaint her with any thing that passed
during the Infancy of her Lady, but proceed to acquaint her with Matters of
greater Importance: And since, said she, you have, no doubt, been most favored
with her Confidence, you will do me a Pleasure to describe to me, exactly, all
the Thoughts of her Soul, as she has communicated them to you, that I may the
better comprehend her History.
