Which concludes with an excellent moral Sentence.

THE Day being come on which they designed to be present at the Races (or, as
Arabella called them, the Games), Miss Glanville, having spent four long Hours
in dressing herself to the greatest Advantage, in order, if possible, to
eclipse her lovely Cousin, whose Mourning, being much deeper, was less capable
of Ornaments, came into her Chamber; and, finding her still in her Morning
Dress, For Heaven's sake, Lady Bella, said she, when do you purpose to be
ready? Why it is almost time to be gone, my Brother says, and here you are not
a bit dressed!

Don't be uneasy, said Arabella, smiling; and, going to her Toilet, I shall not
make you wait long.

Miss Glanville, seating herself near the Table, resolved to be present while
her Cousin was dressing, that she might have an Opportunity to make some
Remarks to her Disadvantage: But she was extremely mortified, to observe the
Haste and Negligence she made her Women use in this important Employment; and
that, notwithstanding her Indifference, nothing could appear more lovely and
genteel.

Miss Glanville, however, pleased herself with the Certainty of seeing her
Cousin's Dress extremely ridiculed, for the peculiar Fashion of her Gown: And
the Veil, which, as becoming as it was, would, by its Novelty, occasion great
Diversion among the Ladies, helped to comfort her for the Superiority of her
Charms; which, partial as she was to her own, she could not help secretly
confessing.

Arabella being dressed in much less time than her Cousin, Mr. Glanville was
admitted, who led her down Stairs to her Coach, which was waiting: His Sister
(secretly repining at the Advantage Arabella had over her, in having so
respectful an Adorer) followed: And, being placed in the Coach, they set out
with great Appearance of Good Humor on all Sides.

They got to -- but just time enough to see the Beginning of the first Course:
Arabella, who fansied the Jockeys were Persons of great Distinction, soon
became interested in the Fate of one of them, whose Appearance pleased her more
than the others. Accordingly, she made Vows for his Success, and appeared so
extremely rejoiced at the Advantage he had gained, that Miss Glanville
maliciously told her, People would make Remarks at the Joy she expressed, and
fansy she had a more than ordinary Interest in that Jockey, who had first
reached the Goal.

Mr. Glanville, whom this impertinent Insinuation of his Sister had filled with
Confusion and Spite, sat biting his Lips, trembling for the Effect it would
produce in Arabella: But she, giving quite another Turn to her Cousin's Words,
I assure you, said she, with a Smile, I am not any further interested in the
Fate of this Person, who has hitherto been successful, than what the
Handsomeness of his Garb, and the Superiority of his Skill, may demand, from an
unprejudiced Spectator: And, though I perceive you imagine he is some concealed
Lover of mine, yet I don't remember to have ever seen him: And I am confident
it is not for my sake that he entered the Lists; nor is it my Presence which
animates him.

Lord bless me, Madam! replied Miss Glanville, Who would ever think of such
strange things as these you talk of? Nobody will pretend to deny that you are
very handsome, to be sure; but yet, thank Heaven, the Sight of you is not so
dangerous, but that such sort of People, as these are, may escape your Chains.

Arabella was so wholly taken up with the Event of the Races, that she gave but
very little Heed to this sarcastic Answer of Miss Glanville; whose Brother,
taking Advantage of an Opportunity which Arabella gave him by putting her Head
quite out of the Coach, chid her very severely for the Liberty she took with
her Cousin. Arabella, by looking earnestly out of the Window, had given so full
a View of her fine Person to a young Baronet, who was not many Paces from the
Coach, that, being struck with Admiration at the Sight of so lovely a Creature,
he was going up to some of her Attendants to ask who she was, when he perceived
Mr. Glanville, with whom he was intimately acquainted, in the Coach with her:
Immediately he made himself known to his Friend, being excessively rejoiced at
having got an Opportunity of beginning an Acquaintance with a Lady whose Sight
had so charmed him.

Mr. Glanville, who had observed the profound Bow he made to Arabella,
accompanied with a Glance that showed an extreme Admiration of her, was very
little pleased at this Meeting; yet he dissembled his Thoughts well enough in
his Reception of him. But Miss Glanville was quite overjoyed, hoping she would
now have her Turn of Gallantry and Compliment: Therefore, accosting him in her
free Manner, Dear Sir George, said she, you come in a lucky Time to brighten up
the Conversation: Relations are such dull Company for one another, it is half a
Minute since we have exchanged a Word.

My Cousin, said Arabella smiling, has so strange a Disposition for Mirth, that
she thinks all her Moments are lost, in which she finds nothing to laugh at:
For my Part, I do so earnestly long to know, to which of these Pretenders
Fortune will give the Victory, that I can suffer my Cares for them to receive
no Interruption from my Cousin's agreeable Gaiety.

Mr. Glanville, observing the Baronet gazed upon Arabella earnestly while she
was speaking those few Words, resolved to hinder him from making any Reply, by
asking him several Questions concerning the Racers, their Owners, and the Bets
which were laid; to which Arabella added, And pray, Sir, said she, do me the
Favor to tell me, if you know who that gallant Man is, who has already won the
first Course.

I don't know really, Madam, said Sir George, what his Name is, extremely
surprised at her Manner of asking.

The Jockey had now gained the Goal a Second time; and Arabella could not
conceal her Satisfaction. Questionless, said she, he is a very extraordinary
Person; but I am afraid we shall not have the Pleasure of knowing who he is;
for if he has any Reason for keeping himself concealed, he will evade any
Inquiries after him, by slipping out of the Lists while this Hurry and Tumult
lasts, as Hortensius did at the Olympic Games; yet, notwithstanding all his
Care, he was discovered by being obliged to fight a single Combat with one of
the Persons whom he had worsted at those Games.

Mr. Glanville, who saw his Sister, by her little Coquetries with Sir George,
had prevented him from hearing great Part of this odd Speech, proposed
returning to the Castle; to which Arabella agreed: But, conceiving Civility
obliged her to offer the Convenience of a Lodging to a Stranger of Sir George's
Appearance, and who was an Acquaintance of her Cousins, You must permit me,
said she to Mr. Glanville, to entreat your noble Friend will accompany us to
the Castle, where he will meet with better Accommodations than at any Inn he
can find; for I conceive, that, coming only to be a Spectator of these Games,
he is wholly unprovided with a Lodging.

The Baronet, surprised at so uncommon a Civility, was at a Loss what Answer to
make her at first; but, recollecting himself, he told her that he would, if she
pleased, do himself the Honor to attend her home; but, as his House was at no
great Distance from --, he would be put to no Inconveniency for a Lodging.

Miss Glanville, who was not willing to part so soon with the Baronet,
insisted, with her Cousin's Leave, upon his coming into the Coach; which he
accordingly did, giving his Horse to the Care of his Servant; and they
proceeded together to the Castle; Arabella still continuing to talk of the
Games, as she called them, while poor Glanville, who was excessively confused,
endeavored to change the Discourse, not without an Apprehension, that every
Subject he could think of, would afford Arabella an Occasion of showing her
Foible; which, notwithstanding the Pain it gave him, could not lessen the Love
he felt for her.

Sir George, whose Admiration of Lady Bella increased the longer he saw her,
was extremely pleased with the Opportunity she had given him of cultivating an
Acquaintance with her: He therefore lengthened out his Visit, in hopes of being
able to say some fine Things to her before he went away; but Miss Glanville,
who strove by all the little Arts she was Mistress of, to engage his
Conversation wholly to herself, put it absolutely out of his Power; so that he
was obliged to take his Leave without having the Satisfaction of even pressing
the fair Hand of Arabella; so closely was he observed by her Cousin. Happy was
it for him, that he was prevented by her Vigilance from attempting a Piece of
Gallantry, which would, undoubtedly, have procured him a Banishment from her
Presence; but, ignorant, how kind Fortune was to him in balking his Designs, he
was ungrateful enough to go away in a mighty ill Humor with this fickle
Goddess: So little capable are poor Mortals of knowing what is best for them!
