Some curious Instructions for relating an History.

ARABELLA, as soon as she left them, went up to her Apartment; and, calling
Lucy into her Closet, told her that she had made Choice of her, since she was
best acquainted with her Thoughts, to relate her History to her Cousins, and a
Person of Quality who was with them.

Sure your Ladyship jests with me, said Lucy: How can I make a History about
your Ladyship?

There is no Occasion, replied Arabella, for you to make a History: There are
Accidents enough in my Life to afford Matter for a long one: All you have to do
is to relate them as exactly as possible. You have lived with me from my
Childhood, and are instructed in all my Adventures; so that you must be
certainly very capable of executing the Task I have honored you with.

Indeed, said Lucy, I must beg your Ladyship will excuse me: I never could tell
how to repeat a Story when I have read it; and I know it is not such simple
Girls as I can tell Histories: It is only sit for Clerks, and such Sort of
People, that are very learned.

You are learned enough for that Purpose, said Arabella; and, if you make so
much Difficulty in performing this Part of your Duty, pray how came you to
imagine you were fit for my Service, and the Distinction I have favored you
with? Did you ever hear of any Woman that refused to relate her Lady's Story,
when desired? Therefore, if you hope to possess my Favor and Confidence any
longer, acquit yourself handsomely of this Task, to which I have preferred you.

Lucy, terrified at the Displeasure she saw in her Lady's Countenance, begged
her to tell her what she must say.

Well! exclaimed Arabella: I am certainly the most unfortunate Woman in the
World! Every thing happens to me in a contrary manner from any other Person!
Here, instead of my desiring you to soften those Parts of my History where you
have greatest room to flatter; and to conceal, if possible, some of those
Disorders my Beauty has occasioned; you ask me to tell you what you must say;
as if it was not necessary you should know as well as myself, and be able, not
only to recount all my Words and Actions, even the smallest and most
inconsiderable, but also all my Thoughts, however instantaneous; relate exactly
every Change of my Countenance; number all my Smiles, Half-smiles, Blushes,
Turnings pale, Glances, Pauses, Full-stops, Interruptions; the Rise and Falling
of my Voice; every Motion of my Eyes; and every Gesture which I have used for
these Ten Years past; nor omit the smallest Circumstance that relates to me.

Lord bless me! Madam, said Lucy, excessively astonished, I never, till this
Moment, it seems, knew the hundredth thousandth Part of what was expected from
me: I am sure, if I had, I would never have gone to Service; for I might well
know I was not fit for such Slavery.

There is no such great Slavery in doing all I have mentioned to you,
interrupted Arabella: It requires, indeed, a good Memory, in which I never
thought you deficient; for you are punctual to the greatest Degree of Exactness
in recounting every thing one desires to hear from you.

Lucy, whom this Praise soothed into good Humor, and flattered with a Belief,
that she was able, with a little Instruction, to perform what her Lady
required, told her, if she pleased only to put her in a Way how to tell her
History, she would engage, after doing it once, to tell it again whenever she
was desired.

Arabella, being obliged to comply with the odd Request, for which there was no
Precedent in all the Romances her Library was stuffed with, began to inform her
in this manner:

First, said she, you must relate my Birth, which you know is very illustrious;
and, because I am willing to spare you the Trouble of repeating Things, that
are not absolutely necessary, you must apologize to your Hearers for slipping
over what passed in my Infancy, and the first Eight or Ten Years of my Life;
not failing, however, to remark, that, from some sprightly Sallies of
Imagination, at those early Years, those about me conceived mavelous Hopes of
my future Understanding: From thence you must proceed to an accurate
Description of my Person.

What! Madam, interrupted Lucy, must I tell what Sort of Person you have, to
People who have seen you but a Moment ago?

Questionless you must, replied Arabella; and herein you follow the Examples of
all the 'Squires and Maids who relate their Masters and Ladies Histories: For,
though it be to a Brother, or near Relation, who has seen them a thousand
times, yet they never omit an exact Account of their Persons.

Very well, Madam, said Lucy: I shall be sure not to forget that Part of my
Story. I wish I was as perfect in all the rest.

Then, Lucy, you must repeat all the Conversations I have ever held with you
upon the Subjects of Love and Gallantry, that your Audience may be so well
acquainted with my Humor, as to know exactly, before they are told, how I
shall behave, in whatever Adventures befall me. -- After that, you may proceed
to tell them, how a noble Unknown saw me at Church; how prodigiously he was
struck with my Appearance; the tumultuous Thoughts that this first View of me
occasioned in his Mind. --

Indeed, Madam, interrupted Lucy again, I cannot pretend to tell his Thoughts:
For how should I know what they were? None but himself can tell that.

However that may be, said Arabella, I expect you should decypher all his
Thoughts, as plainly as he himself could do; otherwise my History will be very
imperfect: Well, I suppose you are at no loss about that whole Adventure, in
which you yourself bore so great a Share; so need not give you any further
Instructions concerning it: Only you must be sure, as I said before, not to
omit the least Circumstance in my Behavior, but relate every thing I did,
said, and thought, upon that Occasion. The disguised Gardener must appear next
in your Story: Here you will of necessity be a little deficient, since you are
not able to acquaint your Hearers with his true Name and Quality; which,
questionless, is very illustrious. However, above all, I must charge you not to
mention that egregious Mistake about the Carp; for, you know how --

Here Miss Glanville's Entrance put a Stop to the Instructions Lucy was
receiving: For she told Arabella, that Sir George was gone.

How! returned she, is he gone? Truly I am not much obliged to him for the
Indifference he has showed to hear my Story.

Why, really, Madam, said Miss Glanville, neither of us expected you would be
as good as your Word, you were so long in sending your Woman down: And my
Brother persuaded Sir George you were only in Jest; and Sir George has carried
him home to Dinner.

And is it at Sir George's, replied Arabella, that your Brother hopes to meet
with an Occasion of clearing himself? He is either very insensible of my Anger,
or very conscious of his own Innocence.

Miss Glanville, having nothing to say in Answer to an Accusation she did not
understand, changed the Discourse: And the two Ladies passed the rest of the
Day together, with tolerable Good Humor on Miss Glanville's Side; who was in
great hopes of making a Conquest of the Baronet, before whom Arabella had made
herself ridiculous enough: But that Lady was far from being at Ease; she had
laid herself under a Necessity of banishing Mr. Glanville, if he did not give
some convincing Proof of his Innocence; which, as Matters stood, she thought
would be very hard for him to procure; and, as she could not absolutely believe
him guilty, she was concerned she had gone so far.
