By which we hope the Reader will be differently affected.

AT their Entrance into the Room, Miss Glanville inquired of the Physician,
just going out, How he found her Brother? Who replied, that his Fever was
increased since last Night; and that it would not (seeing Arabella preparing to
go to his Bedside) be proper to disturb him.

Saying this, he bowed, and went out; and Miss Glanville, repeating what the
Physician had said, begged her to defer speaking to him till another time.

I know, said she, that he apprehends, the Sight of me will cause so many
tumultuous Motions in the Soul of his Patient, as may prove prejudicial to him:
Nevertheless, since his Disorder is, questionless, more in his Mind than Body,
I may prove, happily, a better Physician than he; since I am more likely, than
he, to cure an Illness I have caused --

Saying this, she walked up to Mr. Glanville's Bedside, who, seeing her,
thanked her, with a weak Voice, for coming to see him; assuring her, he was
very sensible of the Favor she did him --

You must not, said she, blushing, thank me too much, lest I think the Favor I
have done you, is really of more Consequence than I imagined, since it merits
so many Acknowlegements: Your Physician tells us, pursued she, that your Life
is in Danger; but I persuade myself, you will value it so much from this
Moment, that you will not protract your Cure any longer.

Are you mad, Madam, whispered Miss Glanville, who stood behind her, to tell my
Brother, that the Physician says he is in Danger? I suppose you really wish he
may die, or you would not talk so.

If, answered she, whispering again to Miss Glanville, you are not satisfied
with what I have already done for your Brother, I will go as far as Modesty
will permit me: And gently pulling open the Curtains;

Glanville, said she, with a Voice too much raised for a sick Person's Ear, I
grant to your Sister's Solicitations, what the fair Statira did to an Interest
yet more powerful, since, as you know, it was her own Brother, who pleaded in
Favor of the dying Orontes: Therefore, considering you in a Condition happily no
less dangerous, than that of that passionate Prince, I condescend, like her, to
tell you, that I do not wish your Death; that I entreat you to live; and,
lastly, by all the Power I have over you, I command you to recover.

Ending these Words, she closed the Curtain, that her transported Lover might
not see her Blushes and Confusion, which were so great, that, to conceal them,
even from Miss Glanville, she hurried out of the Room, and retired to her own
Apartment, expecting, in a little time, to receive a Billet, under the sick
Man's Hand, importing, that, in Obedience to her Commands, he was recovered,
and ready to throw himself at her Feet, to thank her for that Life she had
bestowed upon him, and to dedicate the Remains of it to her Service.

Miss Glanville, who stayed behind her, in a strange Surprise at her ridiculous
Behavior; though she longed to know what her Brother thought of it, finding he
continued silent, would not disturb him. The Shame he conceived at hearing so
absurd a Speech from a Woman he passionately loved; and the Desire he had, not
to hear his Sister's Sentiments upon it; made him counterfeit Sleep, to avoid
any Discourse with her upon so disagreeable a Subject.

That Day his Fever increased; and the next, the Physician pronouncing him in
great Danger, a Messenger was dispatched to Town, to hasten the Coming of Sir
Charles; and poor Miss Glanville was quite inconsoleable, under the
Apprehensions of losing him.

Arabella, not to derogate from her Character, affected great Firmness of Mind
upon this Occasion; she used the most persuasive Eloquence to moderate her
Cousin's Affliction, and caused all imaginable Care to be taken of Mr.
Glanville: While any one was present, her Looks discovered only a calm and
decent Sorrow; yet when she was alone, or had only her dear Lucy with her, she
gave free Vent to her Tears; and discovered a Grief for Mr. Glanville's
Illness, little different from that she had felt for her Father's.

As she now visited him constantly every Day, she took an Opportunity, when she
was alone by his Bedside, to chide him for his Disobedience, in not recovering,
as she had commanded him.

Dear Cousin, answered he faintly, Can you imagine, Health is not my Choice?
And do you think, I would suffer these Pains, if I could possibly ease myself
of them?

Those Pains, replied Arabella, mistaking his Complaint, ought to have ceased,
when the Cause of them did; and when I was no longer rigorous, you ought no
longer to have suffered: But tell me, since you are, questionless, one of the
strangest Men in the World, and the hardest to be comforted; nay, and I may
add, the most disobedient of all, that ever wore the Fetters of Love; Tell me,
I say, what must I do to content you?

If I live, Cousin, said Glanville --

Nay, interrupted Arabella, since my Empire over you is not so absolute as I
thought; and since you think fit to reserve to yourself the Liberty of dying,
contrary to my Desire; I think I had better resolve, not to make any Treaty
with you: However, as I have gone thus far, I will do something more; and tell
you, since I have commanded you to live, I will also permit you to love me, in
order to make the Life I have bestowed on you, worthy your Acceptance. Make me
no Reply, said she, putting her Hand on his Mouth; but begin from this Moment
to obey me.

Saying this, she went out of the Room --

A few Hours after, his Fever being come to a Height, he grew delirious, and
talked very wildly; but a favorable Crisis ensuing, he fell into a sound and
quiet Sleep, and continued in it for several Hours: Upon his waking, the
Physician declared, his Fever was greatly abated; and the next Morning,
pronounced him out of Danger --

Miss Glanville, transported with Joy, ran to Lady Bella, and informed her of
this good News; but as she did not make her the Acknowledgements she expected,
for being the Cause of his Recovery, she behaved with more Reserve than Miss
Glanville thought was necessary: Which renewed her former Disgusts; yet,
dreading to displease her Brother, she concealed it from the Observation of her
Cousin --

Arabella, being desirous of completing her Lover's Cure by some more
favorable Expressions, went to his Chamber, accompanied by Miss Glanville.

I see, said she, approaching to his Bedside, with an enchanting Smile, that
you know how to be obedient, when you please; and I begin to know, by the Price
you set upon your Obedience, that small Favors will not content you.

Indeed, my dearest Cousin, said Glanville, who had found her more interested
in his Recovery than he expected, you have been very obliging, and I will
always most gratefully own it.

I am glad, interrupted Arabella, that Gratitude is not banished from all your
Family; and that that Person in it, for whom I have the most Sensibility, is
not entirely divested of it --

I hope, said Mr. Glanville, my Sister has given you no Cause to complain of
her.

Indeed but she has, replied Arabella; for, notwithstanding she is obliged to
me for the Life of a Brother, whom questionless she loves very well;
nevertheless, she did not deign to make me the least Acknowledgement for what I
have done in your Favor: However, Glanville, provided you continue to observe
that Respect and Fidelity toward me, which I have Reason to hope for from you;
your Condition shall be never the worse for Miss Glanville's unacknowleging
Temper; and I now confirm the Grant I Yesterday made you, and repeat it again;
That I permit you to love me, and promise you not to be displeased at any
Testimonies you will give me of your Passion, provided you serve me with an
inviolable Fidelity.

But, Madam, returned Mr. Glanville, to make my Happiness complete, you must
also promise to love me; or else what signifies the Permission you give me to
love you?

You are almost as unacknowleging as your Sister, resumed Arabella, blushing;
and if your Health was perfectly re-established, questionless, I should chide
you for your Presumption; but since something must be allowed to sick Persons,
whose Reason, one may suppose, is weakened by their Indisposition, I will
pardon your Indiscretion at this time, and counsel you to wait patiently for
what Heaven will determine in your Favor: Therefore endeavor to merit my
Affection by your Respect, Fidelity, and Services; and hope from my Justice,
whatever it ought to bestow --

Ending this Speech, with a Solemnity of Accent, that gave Mr. Glanville to
understand, any Reply would offend her, he silently kissed her fair Hand, which
she held out to him; a Favor, the Terms upon which they now were, and his
Sickness, gave him a Right to expect -- And, finishing her Visit for that time,
left him to his Repose; being extremely pleased at the Prospect of his
Recovery, and very well satisfied at having so gracefully got over so great a
Difficulty, as that of giving him Permission to love her: For by the Laws of
Romance, when a Lady has once given her Lover that Permission, she may lawfully
allow him to talk to her upon the Subject of his Passion, accept all his
Gallantries, and claim an absolute Empire over all his Actions; reserving to
herself the Right of fixing the Time when she may own her Affection: And when
that important Step is taken, and his Constancy put to a few Years more Trial;
when he has killed all his Rivals, and rescued her from a thousand Dangers; she
at last condescends to reward him with her Hand; and all her Adventures are at
an End for the future.

END of the THIRD BOOK.
THE Female QUIXOTE. BOOK IV.