In which our Heroine discovers her Knowledge in Astronomy.

SIR George, who had never missed a Day, during Mr. Glanville's Illness, in
sending to the Castle, now he was able to see Company, visited him very
frequently; and sometimes had the Happiness to meet with Arabella in his
Chamber: But, knowing the Conditions of her Father's Will, and Mr. Glanville's
Pretensions, he was obliged to lay so much Constraint upon himself, in the
Presence of Miss Glanville, and her Brother, that he hardly durst trust his
Eyes, to express his Admiration of her, for Fear of alarming them with any
Suspicion of his Designs: However, he did not fail to recommend himself to her
Esteem, by a Behavior to her full of the most perfect Respect; and very often,
ere he was aware, uttered some of the extravagant Compliments, that the
Gallants in the French Romances use to their Mistresses.

If he walked with her in the Gardens, he would observe, that the Flowers,
which were before languishing and pale, bloomed with fresh Beauty at her
Approach; that the Sun shined out with double Brightness, to exceed, if
possible, the Luster of her Eyes; and that the Wind, fond of kissing her
celestial Countenance, played with her fair Hair; and, by gentle Murmurs,
declared its Happiness --

If Miss Glanville happened to be present, when he talked to her in this
Strain, she would suppose he was ridiculing her Cousin's fantastical Turn; and
when she had an Opportunity of speaking to him alone, would chide him, with a
great deal of good Humor, for giving hrr so much Diversion at her Cousin's
Expense.

Sir George, improving this Hint, persuaded Miss Glanville by his Answers, that
he really laughed at Arabella; and, being now less fearful of giving any
Suspicion to the gay Coquet, since she assisted him to deceive her, he applied
himself, with more Assiduity than ever, to insinuate himself into Arabella's
Flavor.

However, the Necessity he was under of being always of Arabella's Opinion,
sometimes drew him into little Difficulties with Miss Glanville. Knowing that
young Lady was extremely fond of Scandal, he told her, as a most agreeable
Piece of News, one Afternoon when he was there, that he had seen Miss Groves,
who, he supposed, had come into the Country upon the same Account as she had
done a Twelvemonth before: Her Marriage being yet a Secret, the complaisant
Baronet threw out an Hint or two, concerning the Familiarity and Correspondence
there was between her and the Gentleman to whom she was really secretly married.

Miss Glanville, making the most of this Intelligence, said a thousand severe
Things against the unfortunate Miss Groves; which Arabella, always benevolent
and kind, could not bear.

I persuade myself, said she to her Cousin, that you have been misinformed
concerning this Beauty, whose Misfortunes you aggravate by your cruel Censures;
and whoever has given you the History of her Life, has, happily, done it with
great Injustice --

Why, Madam, interrupted Miss Glanville, do you think you are better acquainted
with her History, as you call it, who have never been in Town, where her
Follies made her so remarkable, than Persons who were Eyewitnesses of all her
ridiculous Actions?

I apprehend, said Arabella, that I, who have had a Relation made to me of all
the Passages of her Life, and have been told all her most secret Thoughts, may
know as much, if not more, than Persons who have lived in the same Place with
her, and have not had that Advantage; and I think, I know enough to vindicate
her from many cruel Aspersions.

Pray, Madam, returned Miss Glanville, will your Ladyship pretend to defend her
scandalous Commerce with Mr. L --?

I know not, Miss, said Arabella, why you call her Intercourse with that
perjured Man by so unjust an Epithet. If Miss Groves be unchaste, so was the
renowned Cleopatra, whose Marriage with Julius Caesar is controverted to this
Day.

And what Reasons, Madam, said Miss Glanville, have you for supposing, Miss
Groves was married to Mr. L --, since all the World knows to the contrary?

Very sufficient ones, said Arabella; since it is hardly possible to suppose, a
young Lady of Miss Groves's Quality would stain the Luster of her Descent by so
shameful an Intrigue; and also, since there are Examples enough to be found of
Persons, who suffered under the same unhappy Circumstances as herself; yet were
perfectly innocent, as was that great Queen I have mentioned; who questionless,
you, Sir, are sufficiently convinced, was married to that illustrious
Conqueror; who, by betraying so great and so fair a Queen, in great measure
tarnished the Glory of his Laurels --

Married, Madam! replied Sir George: Who presumes to say, that fair Queen was
not married to that illustrious Conqueror?

Nay, you know, Sir, interrupted Arabella, many People did say, even while she
was living, that she was not married; and have branded her Memory with infamous
Calumnies, upon Account of the Son she had by Caesar, the brave Caesario, who,
under the Name of Cleomedon, performed such Miracles of Valor in Ethiopia.

I assure you, Madam, said Sir George, I was always a great Admirer of the
famous Cleomedon, who was certainly the greatest Hero in the World.

Pardon me, Sir, said Arabella; Cleomedon was, questionless, a very valiant
Man; but he, and all the Heroes that ever were, must give place to the
unequalled Prince of Mauritania; that illustrious, and for a long time
unfortunate, Lover of the Divine Cleopatra, who was Daughter, as you
questionless know, of the great Queen we have been speaking of --

Dear Heart! said Miss Glanville, What is all this to the Purpose? I would fain
know, whether Sir George believes, Miss Groves was ever married to Mr. L --.

Doubtless, I do, said he; for, as Lady Bella says, she is in the same unhappy
Circumstance with the great Cleopatra; and if Julius Caesar could be guilty of
denying his Marriage with that Queen, I see no Reason to suppose, why Mr. L --
might not be guilty of the same kind of Injustice.

So then, interrupted Miss Glanville, blushing with Spite, you will really
offer to maintain, that Miss Groves was married? Ridiculous! How such a Report
would be laughed at in London!

I assure you, replied Arabella, if ever I go to London, I shall not scruple to
maintain that Opinion to every one, who will mention that Fair-one to me; and
use all my Endeavors to confirm them in it.

Your Ladyship would do well, said Miss Glanville, to persuade People, that
Miss Groves, at Fifteen, did not want to run away with her Writing-master.

As I am persuaded myself, said Arabella, that Writing master was some noble
Stranger in Disguise, who was passionately in Love with her, I shall not suffer
any body, in my Hearing, to propagate such an unlikely Story; but since he was
a Person worthy of her Affection, if she had run away with him, her Fault was
not without Example, and even Excuse: You know what the fair Artemisa did for
Alexander, Sir, pursued she, turning to Sir George: I would fain know your
Sentiments upon the Action of that Princess, which some have not scrupled to
condemn --

Whoever they are, Madam, said Sir George, who condemn the fair Artemisa for
what she did for Alexander, are Miscreants and Slanderers; and though that
beautiful Princess has been dead more than Two thousand Years, I would draw my
Sword in Defense of her Character, against all who should presume, in my
Presence, to cast any Censures upon it.

Since you are so courageous, said Miss Glanville, laughing excessively at this
Sally, which, she thought, was to ridicule her Cousin; it is to be hoped, you
will defend a living Lady's Character, who may thank you for it; and make the
World believe, that her Correspondence with Mr. L -- was entirely innocent; and
that she never had any Design to run away with her Writing-master.

Are you resolved, Cousin, said Lady Bella, to persist in that ridiculous
Mistake, and take a Nobleman for a Writing-master only because his Love put him
upon such a Stratagem to obtain his Mistress?

Indeed, Lady Bella, said Miss Glanville, smileing, you may as well persuade
me, the Moon is made of a Cream Cheese, as that any Nobleman turned himself
into a Writing-master, to obtain Miss Groves --

Is it possible, Miss, said Arabella, that you can offer such an Affront to my
Understanding, as to suppose, I would argue upon such a ridiculous System; and
compare the Second glorious Luminary of the Heavens to so unworthy a
Resemblance? I have taken some Pains to contemplate the Heavenly Bodies; and,
by Reading and Observation, am able to comprehend some Part of their
Excellence: Therefore it is not probable, I should descend to such trivial
Comparisons; and liken a Planet, which, happily, is not much less than our Earth,
to a thing so inconsiderable, as that you name --

Pardon me, dear Cousin, interrupted Miss Glanville, laughing louder than
before, if I divert myself a little with the Extravagance of your Notions.
Really I think, you have no Reason to be angry, if I supposed you might make a
Comparison between the Moon and a Cream Cheese; since you say, that same Moon,
which don't appear broader than your Gardener's Face, is not much less than the
whole World: Why, certainly, I have more Reason to trust my own Eyes, than such
whimsical Notions as these.

Arabella, unwilling to expose her Cousin's Ignorance, by a longer Dispute upon
this Subject, begged her to let it drop for the present; and, turning to Sir
George, I am very glad, said she, that having always had some Inclination to
excuse, and even defend, the Flight of Artemisa with Alexander, my Opinion is
warranted by that of a Person so generous as yourself: Indeed, when we
consider, that this Princess forsook her Brother's Dominions, and fled away
with a Lover whom she did not hate; questionless, her Enemies accuse her, with
some Appearance of Reason, of too great Imbecility.

But, Madam, replied Sir George, her Enemies will not take the Pains to examine
her Reasons for this Conduct --

True, Sir, resumed Arabella; for she was in Danger of seeing a Prince, who
loved her, put to a cruel and infamous Death upon a public Scaffold; and she
did not resolve to fly with him, till all her Tears and Prayers were found
ineffectual to move the King her Brother to Mercy.

Though, replied Sir George, I am extremely angry with the indiscreet Cepio, who
discovered Alexander to the Armenian King; yet what does your Ladyship think of
that gallant Action of his, when he saw him upon the Scaffold, and the
Executioner ready to cut off his Head? How brave it was of him, to pass
undauntedly through the prodigious Number of Guards that environed the Scaffold;
and, with his drawn Sword, run the Executioner through-the Body, in the Sight
of them all! Then giving the Prince another Sword, engage more than Two
thousand Men in his Defense!

Questionless, replied Arabella, it was a glorious Action; and when I think,
how the King of Armenia was enraged to see such a Multitude of Soldiers fly
from the Swords of Two Men, I cannot choose but divert myself with the
Consternation he was in: Yet that was nothing to the horrible Despair, which
tormented him afterward, when he found, that Alexander, after being again
taken and imprisoned, had broken his Chains, and carried away with him the
Princess Artimesa his Sister.
