In which our Heroine is engaged in a new Adventure.

AS Mr. Glanville took a great deal of Pains to turn the Discourse upon
Subjects, on which the charming Arabella could expatiate, without any Mixture
of that Absurdity, which mingled itself in a great many others; the rest of
that Day and several others, were passed very agreeably: At the End of which,
Mr. Glanville being perfectly recovered, and able to go abroad; the Baronet
proposed to take the Diversion of Hunting; which Arabella, who was used to it,
consented to partake of; but being informed, that Miss Glanville could not
ride, and chose to stay at home, she would have kept her Company, had not Sir
Charles insisted upon the contrary.

As Sir George, and some other Gentlemen, had invited themselves to be of the
Party; Arabella, on her coming down to mount her Horse, found a great many
young Gallants, ready to offer her their Assistance upon this Occasion:
Accepting therefore, with great Politeness, this Help from a Stranger, who was
nearest her, she mounted her Horse, giving Occasion to every one that was
present, to admire the Grace with which she sat and managed him. Her Shape
being as perfect as any Shape could possibly be, her Riding-habit discovered
all its Beauties: Her Hat, and the white Feather waving over Part of her fine
black Hair, gave a peculiar Charm to her lovely Face: And she appeared with so
many Advantages in this Dress and Posture, that Mr. Glanville, forgetting all
her Absurdities, was wholly lost in the Contemplation of so many Charms, as her
whole Person was adorned with.

Sir George, though he really admired Arabella, was not so passionately in Love
as Mr. Glanville; and, being a keen Sportsman, eagerly pursued the Game, with
the rest of the Hunters; but Mr. Glanville minded nothing but his Cousin, and
kept close by her.

After having rode a long time, Arabella, conceiving it a Piece of Cruelty, not
to give her Lover an Opportunity of talking to her, as, by his extreme
Solicitude, he seemed ardently to desire, coming to a delightful Valley, she
stopped; and told Mr. Glanville, that, being weary of the Chase, she should
alight, and repose herself a little under the Shade of those Trees.

Mr. Glanville, extremely pleased at this Proposition, dismounted; and, having
helped her to alight, seated himself by her on the Grass.

Arabella, expecting he would begin to talk to her of his Passion, could not
help blushing at the Thoughts of having given him such an Opportunity; and Mr.
Glanville, endeavoring to accommodate himself to her Ideas of a Lover,
expressed himself in Terms extravagant enough to have made a reasonable Woman
think he was making a Jest of her: All which, however, Arabella was extremely
pleased with; and she observed such a just Decorum in her Answers, that, as the
Writers of Romance phrase it, if she did not give him any absolute Hopes of
being beloved, yet she said enough to make him conclude she did not hate him.

They had conversed in this manner near a Quarter of an Hour, when Arabella,
perceiving a Man at a little Distance, walking very composedly, shrieked out
aloud; and, rising with the utmost Precipitation, flew from Mr. Glanville, and
went to untie her Horse; while his Astonishment being so great at her
Behavior, that he could not, for a Moment or two, ask her the Cause of her
Fear --

Do you not see, said she, out of Breath with the Violence of her
Apprehensions, the Person who is coming toward us? It is the same, who, some
Months ago, attempted to carry me away, when I was riding out with only Two
Attendants: I escaped, for that time, the Danger that threatened me; but,
questionless, he comes now to renew his Attempts: Therefore can you wonder at
my Fear?

If it should be as you say, Madam, interrupted Glanville, What Reason have you
to fear? Do you not think I am able to defend you?

Ah! without Doubt, you are able to defend me, answered she; and though, if you
offer to resist the Violence he comes to use against me, he will, happily, call
Two or Three Dozen armed Men to his Assistance, who are, I suppose, concealed
hereabouts, yet I am not apprehensive, that you will be worsted by them: But as
it happened to the brave Juba, and Cleomedon, while they were fighting with
some hundred Men, who wanted to carry away their Princesses before their Faces;
and were giving Death at every Blow, in order to preserve them; the Commander
of these Ravishers, seeing the Two Princesses sitting, as I was, under a Tree,
ordered them to be seized by Two of his Men, and carried away, while the Two
Princes were losing best Part of of their Blood in their Defense; therefore, to
prevent such an Accident happening, while you are fighting for my Rescue, I
think it will be the safest Way for me to get on Horseback, that I may be in a
Condition to escape; and that you may not employ your Valor to no Purpose.

Saying this, having, with Mr. Glanville's Assistance, loosed her Horse from
the Tree, he helped her to mount, and then remounted his own.

Your Antagonist, said Arabella, is on Foot; and therefore, though I prize your
Life extremely, yet I cannot dispense with myself from telling you, that it is
against the Laws of Knighthood to take any Advantage of that kind over your
Enemy; nor will I permit your Concern for my Safety to make you forget what you
owe to your own Reputation.

Mr. Glanville, fretting excessively at her Folly, begged her not to make
herself uneasy about things that were never likely to happen.

The Gentleman yonder, added he, seems to have no Designs to make any Attempt
against you: If he should, I shall know how to deal with him: But, since he
neither offers to assault me, nor affront you, I think we ought not to give him
any Reason to imagine we suspect him, by gazing on him thus; and letting him
understand by your Manner, that he is the Subject of our Conversation: If you
please, Madam, we will endeavor to join our Company.

Arabella, while he was speaking, kept her Eyes fixed upon his Face, with Looks
which expressed her Thoughts were laboring upon some very important Point:
And, after a Pause of some Moments, Is it possible, said she, with a Tone of
extreme Surprise, that I should be so mistaken in you? Do you really want
Courage enough to defend me against that Ravisher?

Oh Heavens! Madam, interrupted Glanville, try not my Temper thus: Courage
enough to defend you! 'Sdeath! you will make me mad! Who, in the Name of
Wonder, is going to molest you?

He whom you see there, replied Arabella, pointing to him with her Finger: For
know, cold and insensible as thou art to the Danger which threatens me, yonder
Knight is thy Rival, and a Rival, happily, who deserves my Esteem better than
thou do; since, if he has Courage enough to get me by Violence into his
Power, that same Courage would make him defend me against any Injuries I might
be offered from another: And since nothing is so contemptible in the Eyes of a
Woman, as a Lover who wants Spirit to die in her Defense; know, I can sooner
pardon him, whom thou would cowardly fly from, for the Violence which he
meditates against me, than thyself for the Pusillanimity thou have betrayed in
my Sight.

With these Words, she galloped away from her astonished Lover; who, not daring
to follow her, for fear of increasing her Suspicions of his Cowardice, flung
himself off his Horse in a violent Rage; and, forgetting that the Stranger was
observing, and now within Hearing, he fell accusing and exclaiming against the
Books, that had turned his Cousin's Brain; and railing at his own ill Fate,
that condemned him to the Punishment of loving her. Mr. Harvey (for it really
was he, whom an Affair of Consequence had brought again into the Country),
hearing some of Mr. Glanville's last Words, and observing the Gestures he used,
concluded he had been treated like himself by Arabella, whom he knew again at a
Distance: Therefore coming up to Mr. Glanville, laughing --

Though I have not the Honor of knowing you, Sir, said he, I must beg the
Favor you will inform me, if you are not disturbed at the ridiculous Folly of
the Lady I saw with you just now? She is the most fantastical Creature that
ever lived, and, in my Opinion, fit for a Mad-house: Pray, are you acquainted
with her?

Mr. Glanville, being in a very ill Humor, could not brook the Freedom of this
Language against his Cousin, whose Follies he could not bear any one should
rail at but himself; and, being provoked at his Sneers, and the Interruption he
had given to their Conversation, he looked upon him with a disdainful Frown,
and told him in an haughty Tone, That he was very impertinent to speak of a
Lady of her Quality and Merit so rudely.

Oh! Sir, I beg your Pardon, replied Mr. Harvey, laughing more than before;
What, I suppose, you are the Champion of this fair Lady! But, I assure myself,
if you intend to quarrel with every one that will laugh at her, you will have
more Business upon your Hands than you can well manage.

Mr. Glanville, transported with Rage at this Insolence, hit him such a Blow
with the But-End of his Whip, that it stunned him for a Moment; but recovering
himself, he drew his Sword, and, mad with the Affront he had received, made a
Push at Glanville; who, avoiding it with great Dexterity, had recourse to his
Hanger for his Defense.

Arabella, in the mean time, who had not rid far, concealing herself behind
some Trees, saw all the Actions of her Lover, and intended Ravisher; and, being
possessed with an Opinion of her Cousin's Cowardice, was extremely rejoiced to
see him fall upon his Enemy first, and that with so much Fury, that she had no
longer any Reason to doubt his Courage: Her Suspicions, therefore, being
removed, her Tenderness for him returned; and when she saw them engaged with
their Swords (for, at that Distance, she did not plainly perceive the
Difference of their Weapons), her Apprehensions for her Cousin were so strong,
that, though she did not doubt his Valor, she could not bear to see him expose
his Life for her: And, without making any Reflections upon the Singularity of
her Design, she was going to ride up to them, and endeavor to part them; when
she saw several Men come toward them, whom she took to be the Assistants of
her Ravisher, though they were, in reality, Haymakers; who, at a Distance,
having seen the Beginning of their Quarrel, had hastened to part them.

Terrified, therefore, at this Reinforcement, which she thought would expose
her Cousin to great Danger, she galloped, with all Speed, after the Hunters,
being directed by the Sound of the Horn. Her Anxiety for her Cousin made her
regardless of her own Danger, so that she rode with a surprising Swiftness;
and, overtaking the Company, she would have spoken, to tell them of her
Cousin's Situation; when her Spirits failing her, she could only make a Sign
with her Hand, and sunk down in a Swoon, in the Arms of Sir George, who eagerly
galloped up to her; and, supporting her as well as he was able till some others
came to her Relief, they took her off her Horse, and placed her upon the
Ground; when, by the Help of some Water they brought from a Spring near them,
in a little time she came to herself.

Sir Charles, who, seeing her come up to them without his Son, and by her
fainting, concluded some Misfortune had happened to him, the Moment she opened
her Eyes, asked her eagerly, Where he was?

Your Son, said Arabella, sighing, is, with a Valor equal to that of the brave
Cleomedon, this Moment fighting in my Defense against a Crowd of Enemies; and
is, happily, shedding the last Drop of his Blood in my Quarrel.

Shedding the last Drop of his Blood, happily! interrupted Sir Charles,
excessively grieved; and, not a little enraged at Arabella, supposing she had
introduced him into some Quarrel, It may be happy for you, Madam; but I am sure
it will make me very miserable, if my Son comes to any Harm.

If it be the Will of Heaven he should fall in this Combat, resumed Arabella,
he can never have a more glorious Destiny: And as that Consideration will,
doubtless, sweeten his last Moments, so it ought to be your Consolation:
However, I beg you will lose no time, but haste to his Assistance; for since he
has a considerable Number of Enemies to deal with, it is not improbable but he
may be overpowered at last.

Where did you leave my Son, Madam? cried Sir Charles, eagerly.

He is not far off, replied Arabella: And you will, doubtless, be directed to
the Place, by the Sight of the Blood of his Enemies, which he has spilt. Go
that way, pursued she, pointing with her Finger toward the Place where she had
left her Cousin: There you will meet with him, amidst a Crowd of Foes, which he
is sacrisicing to my Safety, and his just Resentment.

Sir Charles, not knowing what to think, galloped away, followed by most Part
of the Company; Sir George telling Lady Bella, that he would stay to defend her
against any Attempts that might be made on her Liberty, by any of her
Ravisher's Servants, who were, probably, straggling about. Arabella, however,
being perfectly recovered, insisted upon following her Uncle.

There is no Question, said she, but Mr. Glanville is victorious: I am only
apprehensive for the dangerous Wounds he may have received in the Combat, which
will require all our Care and Assistance.

Sir George, who wanted to engross her Company a little to himself, in vain
represented to her, that, amidst the Horrors of a Fight so bloody as that must
certainly be, in which Mr. Glanville and his Friends would be now engaged, it
would be dangerous for her to venture her Person: Yet she would not be
persuaded; but, having mounted her Horse, with his Assistance, she rode as fast
as she was able after the rest of the Company.
