In which the Mistakes are not yet cleared up.

THE Baronet, who had been put into a bad Humor by Arabella's Insinuations,
that Sir George had affronted her, appeared reserved and uneasy; and, being
resolved to question her about it, was willing first to know exactly what it
was his Niece had been offended at: But as he feared, if it came to his Son's
Knowledge, it would produce a Quarrel between the young Gentlemen, that might
have dangerous Consequences, he was desirous of speaking to her alone; and, as
soon as Dinner was over, asked her to take a Walk with him upon the Terrace,
telling her he had something to say to her in private. Arabella, whose Fears
had been considerably increased by the Pensiveness which appeared in her
Uncle's Looks during Dinner, and supposing he wanted a private Conversation,
only to explain himself more clearly to her, than he had yet done, was
excessively alarmed at this Request; and, casting her Eyes down to the Ground,
blushed in such a manner as betrayed her Confusion; and made Miss Glanville and
her Brother believe, that she suspected her Uncle had a Design to press her
soon to give her Hand to Mr. Glanville, which occasioned her apparent Disorder.

Sir Charles, however, who had not so heedfully observed her Behavior,
repeated his Request; adding, with a Smile, upon her giving him no Answer,
Sure, Lady Bella, you are not afraid to be alone with your Uncle.

No, Sir, replied Arabella, giving him a piercing Look; I am not afraid of
being alone with my Uncle; and, as long as he pretends to be no more than my
Uncle, I shall not scruple to hear what he has to say to me.

Sir Charles, a little vexed at an Answer which insinuated, as he thought, a
Complaint of his having pretended to more Authority over her than he ought,
told her, he hoped she had no Cause to believe he would displease her, by any
improper Exertion of that Power over her, with which her Father had entrusted
him: For I assure you, added he, I would rather you should follow my Advice as
an Uncle, than obey me as a Guardian; and, since my Affection for you is,
prehaps, greater than what many People have for a Niece, my Solicitude ought to
be imputed to that Motive.

I have all the Sense I ought to have of that Affection you honor me with,
replied Arabella; and since I hope it will be always what it should be, without
wishing for its Increase, I am contented with those Testimonies I have already
received of it; and do not desire any other.

Sir Charles, a little puzzled to understand the Meaning of these Words, which
the grave Looks of Arabella made yet more mysterious, rose from his Seat with
an Air of Discontent: I should have been glad to have spoken a Word in private
to you, Niece, said she; but, since you think proper to make so much Ceremony
in such a Trifle, I Will defer it till you are in a better Humor.

Miss Glanville, seeing her Father going out of the Room, stepped before him:
Nay, Papa, said she, if you want to speak with my Cousin, my Brother and I will
go out, and leave you to yourselves.

You will do me a very great Displeasure, said Arabella; for, I am sure, my
Uncle has not any thing of Consequence to say to me: Howexer, added she, seeing
Miss Glanville go away, I am resolved, I will not be left alone; and therefore,
Mr. Glanville, since I can pretend to some Power over you, I command you to
stay.

You may remember, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, with a Smile, you refused to
gratify my Curiosity, with regard to something you hinted to me some time ago;
and, to punish you, added he, going out of the Room, I am resolved you shall
listen to what my Father has to say to you; for, by your Unwillingness to hear
it, I imagine you suspect already what it is.

Arabella, finding she had no way to avoid hearing what she dreaded so much,
and observing her Uncle had resumed his Chair, prepared to give him Audience;
but, in order to deprive him of all Hope, that she would receive his Discourse
favorably, she assumed the severest Look she was capable of; and, casting her
Eyes on the Ground, with a Mixture of Anger and Shame, waited with a kind of
Fear and Impatience for what he had to say.

I see, Madam, said the Baronet, observing her Confusion, that you apprehend
what I am going to say to you; but, I beseech you, do not fear I have any
Intentions, but such as you will approve.

You are certainly in the right, Sir, said Arabella, in the Interpretation you
have put on my Looks: I am really in Pain about the Purport of your Discourse:
And you would particularly oblige me, if you would dispense with me from
hearing it.

I see, replied Sir Charles, that, out of a mistaken Fear, you are unwilling to
hear me, in order to avoid coming to the Explanation I desire: But I tell you,
once again, you have nothing to apprehend.

I have every thing to apprehend, Sir, resumed Arabella, tartly, while you
persist in your Design of disobliging me; and you cannot give me a greater
Proof of the Badness of your Intentions, than by thus forcing me to listen to
Discourses I ought to avoid.

Since my Word has no Weight with you, replied Sir Charles, I Will condescend to
assure you, by the most sacred Oath, That I do not mean to come to any
Extremities with Sir George, concerning what you already told me: All I desire
to know is, If you think you had any Reason to be offended with him for any
thing he said? And, in that Case, I cannot dispense with myself from
expostulating with him about it.

You would do me a Favor, Sir, resumed Arabella, if you would interest
yourself a little less in what Sir George said to me: The Offense was committed
against me only; and none but myself has any Right to resent it.

It Is enough, Niece, said Sir Charles, rising: You acknowledge sufficient to
make me resolve to oblige him to ask Pardon for the Affront you have received:
However, I beg you may make yourself easy; no ill Consequences will happen from
this Affair, provided my Son does not know it: And I know you have too much
Discretion to acquaint him with it.

Saying this, he went out of the Room, leaving Arabella in great Consusion at
what he had said; which, in her Opinion, had amounted almost to a plain
Declaration of his Passion; and his Design of putting an End to Sir George's
Pretensions, whom, it was probable, he looked upon as a more dangerous Rival
than his Son, confirmed her in the Opinion of his Resolution to persecute her.

Full of the Reflections this Accident had occasioned, she went to walk in the
Garden, where Mr. Glanville, his Sister having just left him, joined her.

As he imagined, his Father's Design, in speaking to her alone, was to prevail
upon her to consent to marry him before she left the Country, which was what he
most earnestly wished, he drew a bad Omen from the Discontent which appeared in
her Eyes.

Is it with me, Cousin, said he, or with what my Father has been saying to you,
that you are angry?

With both, replied Arabella, hastily; for if you had staid in the Room, as I
commanded you, I should not have been exposed to the Pain of hearing Things so
disagreeable.

Since I knew what would be the Purport of my Father's Discourse, said Mr.
Glanville, you ought not to be surprised I could not resolve to give any
Interruption to it, by my Presence: And, being so much interested in the
Success of his Solicitations, I could not choose but give him an Opportunity of
speaking to you alone, as he desired.

It seems then, resumed Arabella, you know what was the Subject of his
Conversation.

I believe I can guess, interrupted Mr. Glanville, smiling.

Is it possible, cried Arabella, starting back in great Surprise, that,
knowing, as you say you do, your Father's Intentions, you would resolve to
furnish him with an Opportunity of disclosing them?

Can you blame me, said Mr. Glanville, for suffering him to undertake what I
durst not myself? I know your Delicacy, or rather your Severity, so well, that
I am sensible, if I had taken the Liberty to say what my Father has said, you
would have been extremely offended; and punished me, as you have often done,
with a Banishment from your Presence: Nay, pursued he, seeing Astonishment and
Anger in her Countenance, I perceive you are, at this Moment, going to
pronounce some terrible Sentence against me.

You are deceived, said Arabella, with a forced Calmness; I am so far from
being offended with you, that I am ready to acknowledge, you merit very
extraordinary Praises for the perfect Resignation you show to the Will, and,
for your Credit, I will suppose, the Commands, of your Father: But I would
advise you to be contented with the Reputation of being a dutiful Son; and, for
the future, never aspire to that of being a faithful Lover.

Speaking these Words, which were wholly unintelligible to her amazed Admirer,
she left him, and went to her own Apartment, strangely surprised at the
Indifference of Mr. Glanville; who, as she understood what he had said, was not
only willing to resign her to his Father, but also took upon him to mediate in
his behalf.

As she was unwilling to acknowledge, even to herself, that the Grief she felt
at this Discovery, proceeded from any Affection for her Cousin, she imputed it
to the Shame of seeing herself so basely forsaken and neglected; and, not being
able to find a Precedent for such an Indignity offered to the Charms of any
Lady in her Romances, the Singularity of her Fate, in this respect, seemed to
demand all her Uneasiness.
