Which contains some necessary Consequences of the foregoing Mistakes. -- A
Soliloquy on a Love-Letter.

WHILE Arabella passed her Time in her Closet, in the most disagreeable
Reflections, Glanville was racking his Brain to find out the Meaning of those
mysterious Words she had uttered at leaving him: He examined them twenty times
over, but could not possibly penetrate into their Sense: But, supposing at
last, that they really meant nothing at all, or were occasioned by some new
Flight of her Imagination, he went to find out his Father, in order to know
what had passed between him and Arabella.

Sir Charles, however, was not to be found; he had ordered his Horse to be made
ready, under Pretense of taking a little Ride after Dinner; and, passing by Sir
George's House, alighted to pay him a Visit.

The young Baronet, being at home, received him with great Politeness: And Sir
Charles, whose peculiar Disposition was, to be nicely tenacious of every thing
which, he imagined, had any Relation to the Honor of his Family, took the
first Opportunity to question him, concerning the Confusion his Whisper had
occasioned in Lady Bella; adding, That she had confessed, he had given her
Reason to take ill what he had said to her.

Sir George, who was by no means willing to quarrel with the Uncle of Arabella,
received the old Gentleman's Remonstrances with a great deal of Calmness; and,
finding Arabella had not discovered the Purport of that Whisper which had
offended her, he told Sir Charles, That the Confusion he saw in her
Countenance, was occasioned by his raillying her upon the Fright she had been
in upon Mr. Glanville's Account: He added some Particulars to this Account,
that entirely taking away all Inclination in Sir Charles to pursue the Matter
any farther, they parted upon very good Terms; Sir George promising, very soon,
to return his Visit at the Castle.

Mr. Glanville, upon his Father's Return, being impatient to know what he had
said to Arabella, inquired with so much Precipitation, concerning the
Conversation they had had together, that Sir Charles, unwilling to tell him the
Truth, and not having time to consider of an Answer, evaded his Question in
such a manner, that Mr. Glanville could not help making some Observation upon
it; and, comparing this Circumstance with what Arabella had said, though he could
not comprehend the Meaning that seemed to be concealed under their Behavior,
he immediately concluded, there was some Mystery, which it concerned him to
find out.

Possessed with this Opinion, he longed for an Opportunity to talk with
Arabella alone; but he was not so happy to obtain one; for, though that Fair-one
presided at the Tea-table, as usual, and also appeared at Supper, yet she so
industriously avoided all Occasions of being alone with him, though but for a
Moment, and appeared so reserved and uneasy, that it was impossible for him to
speak to her upon that Subject.

As soon as it was time to retire, having resolved to request the Favor of a
few Moments Conversation with her, in her own Apartment; and when he had, as
was his Custom, handed her up Stairs; instead of wishing her a good Night, at
her Chamber Door, he was going to desire Permission to enter it with her; when
Lucy, coming to meet her Lady, whispered her in the Ear; upon which, Arabella,
turning toward him, gave him an hasty Salute, and hurried into her Apartment.

Glanville, no less vexed at this Disappointment, than perplexed at that
Whisper, which had caused such a visible Emotion in Arabella, retired to his
own Room, tormented with a thousand uneasy Suspicions, for which he could not
exactly assign a Cause; and wishing impatiently for the next Day, in which he
hoped to procure some Explanation of what at present greatly perplexed him.

In the mean time, Arabella, who had been informed by Lucy, in that Whisper,
who was eager to let her know it, that a Messenger had brought a Letter from
Sir George, and, late as it was at Night, waited for an Answer, was debating
with herself, whether she should open this Billet or not: She had a strong
Inclination to see what it contained; but, fearful of transgressing the Laws of
Romance, by indulging a Curiosity not justifiable by Example, she resolved to
return this Letter unopened.

Here, said she to Lucy, give this Letter to the Messenger that brought it, and
tell him, I was excessively offended with you, for receiving it from his Hands.

Lucy, taking the Letter, was going to obey her Orders; when, recollecting
herself, she bid her stay.

Since Sir George, said she to herself, is no declared Lover of mine, I may,
without any Offense to Decorum, see what this Letter contains: To refuse
receiving it, will be to acknowledge, that his Sentiments are not unknown to me;
and, by consequence, to lay myself under a Necessity of banishing him: Nor is
it fit, that I should allow him to believe, I am so ready to apprehend the
Meaning of every gallant Speech, which is used to me; and to construe such
Insinuations, as he took the Liberty to make me, into Declarations of Love.

Allowing, therefore, the Justice of these Reasons, she took the Letter out of
Lucy's Hand; and, being upon the Point of opening it, a sudden Thought
controuled her Designs: She threw it suddenly upon her Toilet; and, looking
very earnestly upon it,

Presumptuous Paper! said she, speaking with great Emotion to the Letter: Bold
Repository of thy Master's daring Thoughts! Shall I not be blamed by all, who
hereafter will hear, or read, my History, if, contrary to the Apprehensions I
have, that thou containest a Confession that will displease me, I open thy
Seal, and become accessory to thy Writer's Guilt, by deigning to make myself
acquainted with it? And thou, too indiscreet and unwary Friend, whose Folds
contain the Acknowlegement of his Crime! What will it advantage thee or him,
if, torn by my resenting Hand, I make thee suffer, for the Part thou bear in
thy Master's Fault; and teach him, by thy Fate, how little Kindness he has to
expect from me! Yet, to spare myself the Trouble of reading what will,
questionless, greatly displease me, I will return thee, uninjured, into thy
Master's Hands; and, by that Moderation, make him repent the Presumption he has
been guilty of!
