Containing some Account of Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons, with other
curious Anecdotes.

LADY Bella having recovered her usual Cheerfulness, through the Satisfaction she
felt at her Uncle's returning to Reason, and the Abatement she perceived in Sir
George's extreme Melancholy, mixed in the Conversation with that Wit and
Vivacity which was natural to her, and which so absolutely charmed the whole
Company, that not one of them remembered any of her former Extravagancies.

Mr. Glanville gazed on her with a passionate Tenderness, Sir George with
Admiration, and the old Baronet with Wonder and Delight.

But Miss Glanville, who was inwardly vexed at the Superiority her Cousin's Wit
gave her over herself, wished for nothing more than an Opportunity of
interrupting a Conversation in which she could have no Share; and, willing to
put them in mind of some of Arabella's strange Notions, when she observed them
disputing concerning some of the Actions of the ancient Romans, she very
innocently asked Sir George, Whether in former times Women went to the Wars,
and fought like Men? For my Cousin, added she, talks of one Thaltris, a Woman,
that was as courageous as any Soldier whatever.

Mr. Glanville, horridly vexed at a Question that was likely to engage Arabella
in a Discourse very different from that she had been so capable of pleasing in,
frowned very intelligibly at his Sister; and, to prevent any Answer being given
to her absurd Demand, directed some other Conversation to Arabella: But she,
who saw a favorite Subject started, took no Notice of what Mr. Glanville was
saying to her; but, directing her Looks to Sir George,

Though Miss Glanville, said she, be a little mistaken in the Name of that fair
Queen she has mentioned; yet I am persuaded you know whom she means; and that
it is the renowned Thalestris, whose Valor staggers her Belief, and of whom
she wants to be informed.

Ay, ay, Thalestris, said Miss Glanville: It is such a strange Name I could not
remember it; but, pray, was there ever such a Person?

Certainly, Madam, there was, replied Sir George: She was Queen of the Amazons,
a warlike Nation of Women, who possessed great Part of Cappadocia, and extended
their Conquests so far, that they became formidable to all their Neighbors.

You find, Miss, said Arabella, I did not attempt to impose upon you, when I
told you of the admirable Valor of that beautiful Queen; which indeed was so
great, that the united Princes, in whose Cause she fought, looked upon her
Assistance to be equal to that of a whole Army; and they honored her,
accordingly, with the most distinguishing Marks of their Esteem and
Acknowlegement, and offered her the chief Command of their Forces.

O shameful! cried Sir Charles, offer a Woman the Command of an Army! Brave
Fellows indeed, that would be commanded by a Woman! Sure your mistake, Niece;
there never was such a thing heard of in the World.

What, Sir, said Arabella, will you contradict a Fact attested by the greatest
Historians that ever were? You may as well pretend to say, there never were
such Persons as Oroondates or Juba, as dispute the Existence of the famous
Thalestris.

Why, pray, Madam, said Sir Charles, who were those?

One of them, replied Arabella, was the great King of Scythia; and the other,
Prince of the Two Mauritanias.

Ods-heart! interrupted Sir Charles, I believe their Kingdoms are in the Moon:
I never heard of Scythia, or the Two Mauritanias, before.

And yet, Sir, replied Arabella, those Kingdoms are doubtless as well known, as
France or England; and there is no Question, but the Descendants of the great
Oroondates, and the valiant Juba, sway the Sceptres of them to this Day.

I must confess, said Sir George, I have a very great Admiration for those Two
renowned Princes, and have read their beautiful Exploits with infinite
Pleasure; notwithstanding which, I am more inclined to esteem the great
Artaban, then either of them.

Though Artaban, replied Arabella, is without Question, a Warrior equal to
either of them, and happily no Person in the World possessed so sublime a Courage
as his was; yet, it may be, your Partiality proceeds from another Cause; and
you having the Honor to resemble him in some little Infidelities he was
accused of, with less Justice than yourself perhaps, induces you to favor him
more than any other.

Arabella blushed when she ended these Words: And Sir George replied, with a
Sigh;

I have, indeed, the Honor, Madam, to resemble the great Artaban, in having
dared to raise my Thoughts toward a Divine Person, who, with Reason, condemns
my Adorations.

Hey-day! cried Sir Charles, are you going to speak of Divine Things, after all
the Fables you have been talking of? Troth, I love to hear young Men enter upon
such Subjects: But pray, Niece, who told you Sir George was an Infidel?

Mr. Glanville, replied Arabella: And I am inclined to think he spoke Truth;
for Sir George has never pretended to deny it.

How! interrupted Sir Charles; I am sorry to hear that. I hope you have never,
added he, looking at the young Baronet, endeavored to corrupt my Son with any
of your Free-thinking Principles: I am for every body having Liberty of
Conscience; but I cannot endure to hear People of your Stamp endeavoring to
propagate your mischievous Notions; and because you have no Regard for your own
future Happiness, disturbing other People in the laudable Pursuit of theirs.

We will not absolutely condemn Sir George, said Arabella, till we have heard
his History from his own Mouth, which he promised, some time ago, to relate
when I desired it.

I do not imagine his History is fit to be heard by Ladies, said Sir Charles;
for your Infidels live a strange kind of Life.

However that may be, replied Arabella, we must not dispense with Sir George
from performing his Promise: I dare say there are no Ladies here, who will
think the worse of him for freely confessing his Faults.

You may answer for yourself, if you please, Madam, said Sir Charles; but I
hope my Girl there, will not say as much.

I dare say my Cousin is not so rigid, said Arabella: She has too much the
Spirit of Julia in her, to find Fault with a little Infidelity.

I am always obliged to you for your Comparisons, Cousin, said Miss Glanville:
I suppose this is greatly to my Advantage too.

I assure you, Madam, said Sir George, Lady Bella has done you no Injury by the
Comparison she has just now made; for Julia was one of the finest Princesses in
the World.

Yet she was not free from the Suspicion of Infidelity, replied Arabella; but
though I do not pretend to tax my Cousin with that Fault, yet it is with a
great deal of Reason that I say she resembles her in her volatile Humor.

I was never thought to be ill-humoured in my Life, Madam, said Miss Glanville,
coloring; and I cannot imagine what Reason I have given you for saying I am.

Nay, Cousin, said Arabella, I am not condemning your Humor; for, to say the
Truth, there are a great many Charms in a volatile Disposition; and,
notwithstanding the admirable Beauty of Julia, it is possible she made as many
Slaves by her light and airy Carriage, as she did by her Eyes, though they were
the fairest in the World, except the divine Cleopatra's.

Cleopatra! cried Sir Charles: Why she was a Gypsey, was she not?

I never heard her called so, said Arabella, gravely; and I am apt to believe
you are not at all acquainted with her: But pray, pursued she, let us wave this
Discourse at present, and prepare to listen to Sir George's Relation of his
Life; which, I dare say, is full of very extraordinary Events: However, Sir,
added she, directing her Speech to the young Baronet, I am afraid your Modesty
will induce you to speak with less Candor than you ought, of those great
Actions, which questionless you have performed: Therefore we shall hear your
History, with greater Satisfaction, from the Mouth of your faithful 'Squire,
who will not have the same Reasons that you have, for suppressing what is most
admirable in the Adventures of your Life.

Since it is your Pleasure, Madam, replied Sir George, to hear my Adventures, I
will recount them as well as I am able my self, to the end that I may have an
Opportunity of obliging you by doing some Violence to my natural Modesty, which
will not suffer me to relate Things the World have been pleased to speak of to
my Advantage, without some little Confusion.

Then, casting down his Eyes, he seemed to be recollecting the most material
Passages in his Life. Mr. Glanville, though he could have wished he had not
indulged Arabella in her ridiculous Request, was not able to deny himself the
Diversion of hearing what Kind of History he would invent; and therefore
resolved to stay and listen to him.

Miss Glanville was also highly delighted with the Proposal; but Sir Charles,
who could not conceive there could be any thing worth listening to, in a young
Rake's Account of himself, got up with an Intention to walk in the Garden;
when, perceiving it rained, he changed his Resolution, and, resuming his Seat,
prepared to listen, as every one else did, to the expected Story.

When Sir George, after having paused a Quarter of an Hour longer, during which
all the Company observed a profound Silence, began his Relation in this Manner,
addressing himself to Arabella.

End of the Fifth BOOK.
THE Female QUIXOTE. BOOK VI.