In which Sir George, continuing his surprising History, relates a most
stupendous Instance of a Valor only to be parallelled by that of the great
Oroondates, Caesareo, etc. etc. etc.

FOR some Months, continued Sir George, I prosecuted my Addresses to the
admirable Dorothea; and I flattered myself with a Hope, that I had made some
Progress in her Heart: But, alas! this deceitful Fair-one, who only laughed at
the Torments she made me endure, at the time she vowed eternal Constancy to me,
gave her Hand to a Lover of her Father's providing, and abandoned me, without
Remorse, to the most cruel Despair.

I will not trouble you, Madam, with the Repetition of those Complaints, which
this perfidious Action drew from me for a long time. At length, my Courage
enabling me to overcome the Violence of my Grief, I resolved to think of the
ungrateful Dorothea no more; and the Sight of another Beauty completing my
Cure, I no longer remembered the unfaithful Shepherdess, but with Indifference.

Thus, Madam, have I faithfully related one of those Infidelities, wherewith my
Enemies slander me; who can support their Assertion, with no better Proof, than
that I did not die, when Dorothea abandoned me: But I submit it to your
Candor, whether an unfaithful Mistress deserved such an Instance of Affection,
from a Lover she had betrayed?

Why, really, replied Arabella, after a little Pause, you had some Excuse to
plead for your Failure in this Point: And though you cannot be called, the most
perfect amongst Lovers, seeing you neither died, nor was in Danger of dying;
yet neither ought you to be ranked among those who are most culpable: But pray
proceed in your Story: I shall be better able to form a right Judgment of your
Merit as a Lover, when I have heard all your Adventures.

My Passion for Dorothea, resumed Sir George, being cured by her Treachery
toward me, the Love of Glory began again to revive in my Soul. I panted after
some Occasion to signalize my Valor, which yet I had met with no Opportunity
of doing; but, hearing that a mighty Army was preparing to march upon a secret
Expedition, I privately quitted my Father's Seat; and, attended only by my
faithful 'Squire, I took the same Route the Army had taken, and arrived the Day
before the terrible Battle of -- was fought, where, without making myself
known, I performed such Prodigies of Valor, as astonished all who beheld me.
Without doubt, I should have been highly caressed by the Commander, who
certainly would have given me the Honor of a Victory my Sword alone had
procured for him; but, having unwittingly engaged myself too far in Pursuit of
the flying Enemy, I found myself alone, encompassed with a Party of about Five
hundred Men; who, seeing they were pursued only by a single Man, faced about,
and prepared to kill or take me Prisoner.

Pray, Sir, interrupted Sir Charles, when did all this happen? And how came it
to pass, that your Friends have been ignorant to this Moment of those Prodigies
of Valor you performed at that Battle? I never heard you was ever in a Battle:
Fame has done you great Injustice, by concealing the Part you had in that
famous Victory.

The great Care I took to conceal myself, replied Sir George, was one Reason
why my Friends did not attribute to me the Exploits, which the Knight in black
Armor, who was no other than myself, performed; and the Accident I am going to
relate, prevented my being discovered, while the Memory of those great Exploits
were yet fresh in the Minds of those I had so greatly obliged.

Be pleased to know, therefore, Madam, that, seeing myself about to be
encompassed by this Party of the Enemy, I disdained to fly; and, though I was
alone, resolved to sustain their Attack, and sell my Life as dear as possible.

Why, if you did so, you was a Madman, cried Sir Charles in a Heat: The bravest
Man that ever lived, would not have presumed to fight with so great a Number of
Enemies. What could you expect, but to be cut in Pieces? Pooh! pooh! don't
think any body will credit such a ridiculous Tale: I never knew you was so
addicted to --

Lying, perhaps, the good Knight would have said; but Sir George, who was
concerned he was present at his Legend, and could not blame him for doubting
his Veracity, prevented his Utterance of a Word he would be obliged to take
ill, by abruptly going on with his Story.

Placing my Back therefore against a Tree, pursued he, to prevent my being
assaulted behind, I presented my Shield to the Boldest of these Assailants;
who, having struck an impotent Blow upon it, as he was lifting up his Arm to
renew his Attack, I cut it off with one Stroke of my Sword; and the same
Instant plunged it to the Hilt in the Breast of another, and clove the Scull of
a Third, who was making at me, in two Parts.

Sir Charles, at this Relation, burst into a loud Fit of Laughter; and, being
more inclined to divert himself, than be offended at the Folly and Vanity of
the young Baronet, he permitted him to go on with his surprising Story, without
giving him any other Interruption.

These Three Executions, Madam, pursued Sir George, were the Effects only of so
many Blows; which raised such Indignation in my Enemies, that they pressed
forward in great Numbers to destroy me; but, having, as I before said, posted
myself so advantageously, that I could only be assaulted before, not more than
Three or Four could attack me at one time. The Desire of lengthening out my
Life, till happily some Succor might come to my Relief, so invigorated my Arm,
and added to my ordinary Strength an almost irresistible Force, that I dealt
Death at every Blow; and in less than a quarter of an Hour, saw more than Fifty
of my Enemies at my Feet, whose Bodies served for a Bulwark against their
Fellows Swords.

The Commander of this little Body, not having Generosity enough to be moved
with those prodigious Effects of my Valor in my Favor, was transported with
Rage at my Resistance; and the Sight of so many of his Men slain before his
Face, served only to increase his Fury; and that Moment, seeing, that, with Two
more Blows, I had sent Two of his most valiant Soldiers to the Shades, and that
the rest fearing to come within the Length of my Sword, had given me a few
Moments Respite,

Ah! Cowards! cried he, are you afraid of a single Man? And will you suffer him
to escape from your Vengeance, who has slain so many of your brave Comrades
before your Eyes?

These Words inspiring them with a Fierceness, such as he desired, they
advanced toward me with more Fury than before: By this time, I had received
several large Wounds, and my Blood ran down from many Parts of my Body: Yet was
I not sensible of any Decay of Strength, nor did the settled Designs of my
Enemies to destroy me daunt me in the least: I still relied upon the Assistance
I expected Providence would send to my Relief, and determined, if possible, to
preserve my Life, till it arrived.

I fought, therefore, with a Resolution, which astonished my Enemies, but did
not move them to any Regard for my Safety: And, observing their brutal
Commander, a few Paces from me, encouraging his Men, both with his Cries and
Gestures, Indignation against this inhuman Wretch so transported me out of my
Discretion, that I quitted my Post, in order to sacrifice him to my Revenge.

Seeing me advance furiously toward him, he turned pale with Fear, and
endeavored to shelter himself in the midst of his Men; who, more valiant than
himself, opposed themselves to my Rage, to favor his Retreat: But quickly
clearing myself a Way with my Sword, I pressed toward the barbarous Coward;
and, ere he could avoid the Blow I aimed at him, it struck him senseless at my
Feet.

My particular Revenge thus satisfied, I was sensible of the Fault I had
committed in quitting my Post, by which I exposed myself to be surrounded by
the Enemy. I endeavored to regain it, but in vain: I was beset on all Sides,
and now despaired of any Safety; and therefore only fought to die courageously,
and make as many of my Enemies as I could, attend my Fall.

Exasperated by the Misfortune of their Commander, they pressed upon me with
redoubled Fury. Faint as I was, with the Loss of Blood, and so fatigued with
the past Action, and the obstinate Fight I had maintained so long with such a
considerable Number, I could hardly any longer lift up my Arm; and, to
complete, my Misfortune, having thrust my Sword into the Body of one of the
forwardest of my Enemies, in my endeavoring to regain it, it broke in Pieces,
and the Hilt only remained in my Hand.

This Accident completed my Defeat: Deprived of my Sword, I was no longer
capable of making any Defense: Several of them pressed upon me at once; and,
throwing me down, tied my Hands together behind me. Shame and Rage at this
Indignity worked so forcibly upon my Spirts, weakened as I then was, that I
fell into a Swoon. What happened till my Recovery, I am not able to tell; but,
at the Return of my Senses, I found myself laid on a Bed in a tolerable
Chamber, and some Persons with me, who kept a profound Silence.
