A Love-Adventure, after the Romantic Taste.

RECOLLECTING in a few Moments all that happened to me, I could not choose but
be surprised at finding myself treated with so little Severity, considering I
was Prisoner to Persons who had been Witnesses of the great Quantity of Blood I
had shed in my own Defense. My Wounds had been dressed while I continued in my
Swoon; and the Faces of those Persons who were about me, expressed nothing of
Unkindness.

After reflecting some time longer on my Situation, I called to a young Man,
who sat near my Bedside, and entreated him to inform me, Where I was, and to
whom I was a Prisoner? But could get no other Answer to those Questions, than a
most civil Entreaty to compose myself, and not protract the Cure of my Wounds
by talking, which, the Surgeons had declared, would be of a bad Consequence;
and had therefore ordered me to be as little disturbed as possible.

Notwithstanding this Remonstrance, I repeated my Request, promising to be
entirely governed by them for the future in what regarded my Health, provided
they would satisfy me in those Particulars: But my Attendant did not so much as
reply to those Importunities; but, to prevent the Continuance of them, rose
from his Seat, and retired to the other End of the Chamber.

I passed that Day, and several others, without being able to learn the Truth
of my Condition: All this time, I was diligently waited on by the two Persons I
had first seen, neither of whom I could prevail upon to inform me of what I
desired to know; and, judging, by this obstinate Reserve, and the Manner of my
Treatment, that there was some Mystery in the Case, I forbore to ask them any
more Questions, conceiving they had particular Orders not to answer them.

The Care that was taken to forward my Cure, in Three Weeks entirely restored
me to Health: I longed impatiently to know, what was to be my Destiny; and
busied myself in conjecturing it, in vain; when, one Morning, an elderly Lady
entered my Chamber, at whose Appearance my Two Attendants retired.

After she had saluted me very civilly, and inquired after my Health, she
seated herself in a Chair near my Bedside, and spoke to me in this manner:

I make no question, Sir, but you are surprised at the Manner in which you have
been treated, and the Care there has been taken to prevent discovering to you
the Place where you now are; but you will doubtless be more surprised, to hear
you are in the Fortress of --, and in the House of Prince Marcomire, whose
Party you fought against alone; and whom you so dangerously wounded, before you
was taken Prisoner by his Men.

Is it possible, Madam, said I, who, from the first Moment of her Appearance,
had been in a strange Perplexity, is it possible, I am in the House of a Man,
whose Life I endeavored so eagerly to destroy? And is it to him, who oppressed
me so basely with Numbers, that I am obliged for the Succor I have received?

It is not to him, replied the Lady, that you are obliged for the favorable
Treatment you have had; but listen to me patiently, and I will disclose the
Truth of your Adventure.

Prince Marcomire, who was the Person that headed that Party against which you
so valiantly defended yourself, after the Loss of the Battle, was hastening to
throw himself into this Place, where his Sister, and many Ladies of Quality,
had come for Security: Your indiscreet Pursuit engaged you in the most unequal
Combat that ever was fought; and --

Nay, Sir, interrupted Arabella, though I do not refuse to give you all the
Praises your gallant Defense of yourself against Five hundred Men deserves; yet
I cannot agree with that Lady, in saying, it was the most unequal Combat that
ever was fought: For, do but reflect, I beseech you, upon that which the brave
Prince of Mauritania sustained against twice that Number of Men, with no other
Arms than his Sword; and, you having been in Battle that Day, was, as I
conceive, completely armed. The young Prince of Egypt, accompanied only by the
valiant, but indiscreet, Cepio his Friend, engaged all the King of Armenia's
Guards, and put them all to Flight. The courageous Ariobasanes scorned to turn
his Back upon a whole Army; not to mention the invincible Artaban, whom a
thousand Armies together could not have made to turn.

Be pleased to observe, Madam, said Sir George, that to the end I may
faithfully recount my History, I am under a Necessity of repeating Things,
which, happily, may seem too advantageous for a Man to say of himself: Therefore
I indeed greatly approve of the Custom, which, no doubt, this Inconveniency
introduced, of a 'Squire, who is thoroughly instructed with the Secrets of his
Master's Heart, relating his Adventures, and giving a proper Eulogium of his
rare Valor, without being in Danger of offending the Modesty of the renowned
Knight; who, as you know, Madam, upon those Occasions, commodiously slips away.

It being, however, this Lady's Opinion, that no Man ever undertook a more
hazardous Combat, or with greater Odds, against him, she did not fail to
express her Admiration of it, in very high Terms.

The Noise of this Accident, pursued she, was soon spread over the whole Town;
and the beautiful Sydimiris, Marcomire's Sister, hearing that her Brother was
wounded, as it was thought to Death, and that the Person who killed him, was
taken Prisoner; she flew out to meet her wounded Brother, distracted with
Grief, and vowing to have the severest Tortures executed on him, who had thus
barbarously murdered her Brother. Those who bore that unhappy Prince, having
brought him into the House, his Wounds were searched; and the Surgeons
declared, they were very dangerous.

Sydimiris, hearing this, redoubled her Complaints and Vows of Vengeance
against you: Her Brother having then the chief Authority in the Place, she
commanded, in his Name, to have you brought hither, and to be most strictly
guarded; determined, if her Brother died, to sacrifice you to his Ghost.

Full of these sanguinary Resolutions, she left his Chamber, having seen him
laid in Bed; and his Wounds dressed; but passing along a Gallery to her own
Apartment, she met the Persons who were bringing you to the Room that was to be
your Prison: You was not, pursued the Lady, yet recovered from your Swoon, so
that they carried you like one that was dead: They had taken off your Helmet to
give you Air; by which means your Face being quite uncovered, pale,
languishing, and your Eyes closed, as if in Death, presented the most moving,
and, at the same time, most pleasing Object in the World.

Sydimiris, who stopped, and for a Moment eagerly gazed upon you, lost all of a
sudden the Fierceness, which before had animated her against you: And lifting
up her Eyes to view those Men that carried you;

Are you sure, said she to them, that this is the Person who wounded my Brother?

Yes, Madam, replied one of them; this must be he, since there was no other in
his Company; and he alone sustained the Attack of Five hundred Men; and would
probably not have left one of them alive, had not his Sword, by breaking, put
it into our Power to take him Prisoner.

Carry him away, said Sydimiris; but let his Wounds be dressed, and let him be
carefully looked to, that, if my Brother dies, he may be punished as he
deserves.

Pronouncing these Words in a low and faltering Voice, she turned her Eyes a
second time upon you; then, hastily averting her Looks, she hurried to her own
Chamber, and threw herself into a Chair, with all the Marks of a very great
Disturbance.

The Affection I have for her, being the Person who had brought her up, and
most favored with her Confidence, made me behold her in this Condition with
great Concern; and supposing it was her Brother that disquieted her, I besought
her not to give way to the Violence of her Grief, but to hope that Heaven would
restore him to her Prayers.

Alas! my dear Urinoe, said she, I am more culpable than you can imagine; and I
grieve less for the Condition to which I see Marcomire reduced, than for that
Moderation wherewith I am constrained, spite of myself, to behold his Enemy.

Yes, dear Urinoe, pursued she, blushing, and casting down her Eyes, the
Actions of this Unknown appear to me in quite another Light, since I have seen
him; and, instead of looking upon him as the Murderer of my Brother, I cannot
help admiring that rare Valor, with which he defended himself against so great
a Number of Enemies; and am even ready to condemn the furious Marcomire, for
oppressing so brave a Man.

As I had never approved of those violent Transports of Grief and Rage, which
she had expressed upon the first News of her Brother's Misfortune; and as I
looked upon your glorious Defense with the utmost Admiration; so, far from
condemning the Change of her Thoughts, I confirmed her in the favorable
Opinion she began to entertain of you; and, continuing to make Remarks upon all
the Particulars of the Combat, which had come to our Knowledge, we found nothing
in your Behavior, but what increased our Admiration.

Sydimiris therefore, following the Dictates of her own Generosity, as well as
my Advice, placed Two Persons about you, whose Fidelity we could rely on; and
gave them Orders to treat you with all imaginable Care and Respect, but not to
inform you of the Place in which you was, or to whom you was Prisoner.

In the mean time, Marcomire, whose Wounds had been again examined, was
declared out of Danger by the Surgeons; and he having understood the Excess of
his Sister's Grief, and the Revenge she had vowed against you, gave her Thanks
for those Expressions of her Tenderness; and also uttered some Threats, which
intimated a violent Hatred against you; and a Design of prosecuting his Revenge
upon you, as soon as he was in a Condition to leave his Chamber.

Sydimiris, who heard him, could with Difficulty dissemble her Concern.

Ah! Urinoe, said she to me, when we were alone; it is now, that I more than
ever repent of that Excess of Rage, which transported me against the brave
Unknown. I have thereby put him entirely into my Brother's Power, and shall be
happily accessory to that Death he is meditating for him, or else a perpetual
Imprisonment.

This Reflection gave her so much Pain, that I could not choose but pity her;
and considering, that the only way to preserve you, was for her to dissemble a
Rage equal to Marcomire's against you, in order to prevent being suspected of
any Design in your Favor, I persuaded her to join with him in every thing he
said; while, in the mean time, we would endeavor to get you cured of your
Wounds, that you might at least be in a Condition once more to defend yourself
with that miraculous Valor Heaven has bestowed on you.

Sydimiris perceiving her Brother would soon be in a Condition to execute his
Threats, resolved to hazard every thing, rather than to expose you to his Rage:
She therefore communicated to me her Design of giving you Liberty, and, by
presenting a sufficient Reward to your Guard, inducing them to favor your
Escape.

I undertook to manage this Business in her Name, and have done it so
effectually, that you will this Night be at Liberty, and may depart the Town
immediately, in which it will be dangerous to stay any time, for fear of being
discovered.

Sydimiris forbad me to let you know the Person to whom you would be obliged
for your Freedom; but I could not endure, that you should unjustly involve the
Sister of Marcomire, in that Resentment you will questionless always preserve
against him; and to keep you from being innocently guilty of Ingratitude, I
resolved to acquaint you with the Nature of those Obligations you owe to her.
