An extraordinary Instance of Generosity in a Lover, somewhat resembling that
of the great Artaxerxes, in Cassandra.

THE farther I went, continued Sir George, the more my Regret increased; and,
finding it would be impossible to live, and quit the Divine Sydimiris, I all at
once took a Resolution to remain in the Town concealed; and, communicating my
Design to my Guide, I engaged him to assist me in it, by a Present of a
considerable Sum, which he could not resist: Accordingly he left me in a remote
Part of the Town, and went to find out a convenient Lodging for me; which he
soon procured, and also a Suit of Clothes to disguise me, my own being very
rich and magnificent.

Having recommended me as a Relation of his, who was newly arrived, I was
received very civilly by the People with whom he placed me; and, finding this
young Man to be very witty and discreet, and also very capable of serving me, I
communicated to him my Intentions by staying, which were only to be near the
Divine Sydimiris, and to have the Happiness of sometimes seeing her, when she
went abroad.

This Man entering into my Meaning, assured me, he would faithfully keep my
Secret; and that he would not fail to bring me Intelligence of all that passed
in the Palace of Marcomire.

I could with Difficulty keep myself from falling at his Feet, to express my
Sense of his kind and generous Offers; but I contented myself with presenting
him another Sum of Money, larger than the first, and assured him of my future
Gratitude.

He then took Leave, and left me to my Reflections, which were wholly upon the
Image of the Divine Sydimiris, and the Happiness of being so near the Object I
adored.

My Confident came to me the next Day; but brought me no other News, than that
my Escape was not yet known to Marcomire. I inquired if he had seen Sydimiris;
but he replied he had not, and that Urinoe had only asked him, if he had
conducted me safe out of Town: To which he had answered as we had agreed, that
I had got out safe and undiscovered.

A Day or two after, he brought me News more pleasing; for he told me, that
Sydimiris had sent for him into her Chamber, and asked him several Questions
concerning me: That she appeared very melancholy, and even blushed, whenever
she mentioned my Name.

This Account gave sufficient Matter for my Thoughts to work upon for several
Days. I interpreted Sydimiris's Blush a Thousand different Ways; I reflected
upon all the different Causes to which it might be owing, and busied myself
with all those innumerable Conjectures, which, as you know, Madam, such an
Incident always gives Rise to in a Lover's Imagination. At length I explained
it to my own Advantage, and felt thereby a considerable Increase of my
Affection.

A whole Week having elapsed, without another Sight of my Confidant, I began to
be greatly alarmed; when, on the Eighth Day of this cruel Suspense, I saw him
appear; but with so many Marks of Disturbance in his Face, that I trembled to
hear what he had to acquaint me with.

Oh! Sir, said he, as soon as his Concern suffered him to speak, Marcomire has
discovered your Escape, and the Means by which it was procured: One of those in
whom Urinoe confided, has betrayed it to him; and the beauteous Sydimiris is
likely to feel the most terrible Effects of his Displeasure: He has confined
her to her Chamber, and vows to sacrifice her Life to the Honor of his Family;
which he says, she has stained; and he loads that admirable Lady with so many
Reproaches, that it is thought, her Grief for such undeserved Calumnies will
occasion her Death.

Scarce had he finished these cruel Words, when I, who all the time he had been
speaking, beheld him with a dying Eye, sunk down at his Feet in a Swoon; which
continued so long, that he began to think me quite dead: However I at last
opened my Eyes; but it was only to pour forth a River of Tears, and to utter
Complaints, which might have moved the most obdurate Heart.

After having a long time tormented myself in weeping and complaining, I at
last took a Resolution, which afforded me some Alleviation of my Grief; and the
faithful Toxares, seeing me a little composed, left me to myself, with a
Promise to return soon, and acquaint me with what passed further in the Palace
of Marcomire.

As soon as he was gone, I rose from my Bed; and, dressing myself in those
Clothes I wore when I was taken Prisoner, I went to the Palace of Marcomire;
and, demanding to see him, I was told he was in the Apartment of Sydimiris;
and, at my earnest Desire, they conducted me thither.

When I entered the Room, I beheld that incomparable Beauty stretched upon a
Couch, dissolved in Tears; and Urinoe upon her Knees, before her, accompanying
with her own, those precious Drops which fell from the bright Eyes of her
Mistress.

Marcomire, who was walking furiously about the Room, exclaiming with the
utmost Violence against that fair Sufferer, did not observe my Entrance; so
that I had an Opportunity of going toward Sydimiris, who, lifting up her Eyes
to look upon me, gave a loud Shriek; and, by a Look of extreme Anguish, let me
understand, how great her Apprehensions were upon my Account.

I am come, Madam, said I, to perform Part of the Promise I made you, and by
dying, to prove your Innocence; and, freeing you from the Reproaches you suffer
on my Account, I shall have the Happiness to convince you, that my Life is
infinitely less dear to me, than your Tranquillity. Sydimiris, who hearkened to
me with great Emotion, was going to make some Answer, when Marcomire, alarmed
by his Sister's Shriek, came toward us, and, viewing me at first with
Astonishment, and then with a Smile of Cruelty and Revenge,

Is it possible, said he, that I behold my designed Murderer again in my Power?

I am in thy Power, said I, because I am willing to be so; and came voluntarily
to put myself into your Hands, to free that excellent Lady from the Imputation
you have laid on her: Know, Marcomire, that it is to myself alone I owed my
Liberty, which I would still preserve against all the Forces thou could bring
to deprive me of it; and this Sword, which left thee Life enough to threaten
mine, would happily once more put yours in Danger, were I not restrained by a
powerful Consideration, which leaves me not the Liberty of even wishing you ill.

Ah! Dissembler, said Marcomire, in a Rage, think not to impose upon me by thy
counterfeited Mildness: Thou art my Prisoner once more, and I shall take care
to prevent your escaping a Second time.

I am not your Prisoner, replied I, while I possess this Sword, which has
already defended me against greater Numbers than you have here to oppose me;
but, continued I, throwing down my Sword at Sydimiris's Feet, I resign my
Liberty to restore that Lady to your good Opinion, and to free her from those
base Aspersions thou have unjustly loaded her with, upon my Account.

It matters not, said the brutal Brother, taking up my Sword, whether thou have
resigned, or I have deprived thee of Liberty; but since thou art in my Power,
thou shall feel all the Effects of my Resentment: Take him away, pursued he to
some of his People; put him into the worst Dungeon you can find; and let him be
guarded carefully, upon Pain of Death, if he again escapes.

With these Words, several Men offered to lead me out of the Room; but I
repulsed them with Disdain; and, making a low Reverence to Sydimiris, whose
Countenance expressed the Extremes of Fear and Anguish, I followed my
Conductors to the Prison allotted for me; which, hideous as it was, I
contemplated with a secret Pleasure, since I had by that Action, which had
brought me into it, given a Testimony of my Love for the adorable Sydimiris.

CHAPTER VI.
In which it will be seen, that the Lady is as generous as her Lover.

I Passed some Days in this Confinement, melancholy enough: My Ignorance of the
Destiny of Sydimiris gave me more Pain than the Sense of my own Misfortunes;
and one Evening, when I was more then usually disquieted, one of my Guard
entered my Prison, and, giving me a Letter, retired, without speaking a Word: I
opened this Letter with Precipitation, and, by the Light of a Lamp which was
allowed me, I read the following Words.

Sydimiris, To the most generous Bellmour.
IT is not enough to tell you, that the Method you took to free me from my
Brother's Severity, has filled me with the utmost Esteem and Admiration. So
generous an Action merits a greater Acknowlegement, and I will make no Scruple
to confess, that my Heart is most sensibly touched by it: Yes, Bellmour, I have
received this glorious Testimony of your Affection with such a Gratitude, as
you yourself could have wished to inspire me with; and it shall not be long,
before you will have a convincing Proof of the Effect it has had upon the
Spirit of

Sydimiris.


This Letter, Madam, pursued Sir George, being wholly calculated to make me
hope that I was not hated by the Divine Sydimiris; and that she meditated
something in my Favor; I resigned myself up to the most delightful
Expectations.

What! cried I, transported with the Excess of my Joy: Does the most admirable
Sydimiris condescend to assure me, that I have touched her Heart? And does she
promise me, that I shall receive some convincing Proof of her Acknowlegement?

Ah! too happy, and too fortunate Bellmour, to what a glorious Destiny have
thou been reserved! And how ought thou to adore these Fetters, that have
procured thee the Esteem of the Divine Sydimiris! --

Such, Madam, were the Apprehensions, which the Billet I had received inspired
me with. I continually flattered myself with the most pleasing Hopes; and
during Three Weeks longer, in which I heard no more from Sydimiris, my
Imagination, was wholly filled with those sweet Thoughts, which her Letter had
made me entertain.

At length, on the Evening of a Day which I had wholly spent in reading over
Sydimiris's Letter; and interpreting the Sense of it a thousand different Ways,
but all agreeable to my ardent Wishes; I saw the sage Urinoe enter my Prison,
accompanied by Toxares, whom I had not seen during my last Confinement. Wholly
transported at the Sight of these Two Friends, and not doubting but they had
brought me the most agreeable News, I ran toward them; and, throwing my self
at Urinoe's Feet, I begged her, in an Ecstacy of Joy, to acquaint me with
Sydimiris's Commands.

Urinoe, in some Confusion at this Action, entreated me to rise. It Is fit,
cried I, in a Transport I could not master, that in this Posture I should
receive the Knowledge of that Felicity Sydimiris has had the Goodness to promise
me. Urinoe sighed at these Words; and, beholding me with a Look of Compassion
and Tenderness,

Would to God, said she, that all I have to say, were as agreeable, as the
first News I have to tell you; which is, that you are free, and at Liberty to
leave the Town this Moment! Sydimiris, continued she, has bought your Freedom,
at the Expense of her own; and, to deliver you from her Brother's Chains, she
has put on others, happily more cruel than those you have worn: In fine, she has
married a Man, whom she detested, to procure your Liberty; her Brother having
granted it to her upon that Condition alone.

Scarce had Urinoe finished these Words, when I fell, without Sense or Motion,
at her Feet. Toxares and she, who had foreseen what might happen, having
provided themselves with Cordials necessary to restore me, brought me to myself
with infinite Trouble.

Cruel! said I to them, with a Tone and Look, which witnessed the Excess of my
Despair, Why have you hindered me from dying, at once to prevent the thousand
Deaths I shall suffer from my Grief? Is this the Confirmation of those glorious
Hopes Sydimiris had permitted me to entertain? Is this that Proof of the
Acknowlegements I was to expect? And is it by throwing herself into the Arms of
my Rival, that she repays those Obligations she thinks she owes me?

Ah! inhuman Sydimiris! was it to make my Despair more poignant, that thou
flatterest me with such a Prospect of Happiness? And was it necessary, to the
Grandeur of thy Nuptials, that my Life should be the Sacrifice?

But, how unjust am I, cried I, repenting in an Instant of those injurious
Suspicions; How unjust am I, to accuse the Divine Sydimiris of Inhumanity? Was
it not to give me Freedom, that she bestowed herself upon a Man she hates? And
has she not made herself miserable for ever, to procure me a fansied Happiness?

Ah! if it be so, what a Wretch am I? I, who have been the only Cause of that
Misery, to which she has doomed herself? Ah! Liberty! pursued I, how I detest
thee, since purchased by the Misfortune of Sydimiris! And how far more sweet
and glorious were those Chains, which I wore for her sake!

My Sighs and Tears leaving me no longer the Power of Speech, I sunk down on my
Bed, oppressed with a mortal Grief.

Urinoe and Toxares drew near to comfort me, and said all that sensible and
discreet Persons could think of to alleviate my Despair.

Though I have heard that Sydimiris is married, replied I, without dying
immediately; yet do not imagine, that I will suffer this odious Life to
continue long. If Sorrow do not quickly dispatch me, I will seek Death by other
Means; for since Sydimiris is lost, I have no more Business in the World.

The charitable Urinoe and Toxares endeavored in vain to divert me from this
sad Resolution, when Urinoe, finding all their Reasonings ineffectual, drew a
Letter out of her Pocket, and, presenting it to me, I had Orders, said she, not
to let this Letter be delivered to you, till you had left the Town; but the
Despair, to which I see you reduced, does, I conceive, dispense with my
rigorous Observation of those Directions.

While Urinoe was speaking, I opened this Letter trembling, and found it as
follows.
