In which one of our Heroine's Whims is justified, by some others full as
whimsical.

THIS Piece of History, with Sir Charles's Remarks upon it, brought them into
Bath. Their Lodgings being provided beforehand, the Ladies retired to their
different Chambers, to repose themselves after the Fatigue of their Journey,
and did not meet again till Supper was on Table; when Miss Glanville, who had
eagerly enquired what Company was then in the Place, and heard there were a
great many Persons of Fashion just arrived, pressed Arabella to go to the
Pump-Room the next Morning, assuring her she would find a very agreeable
Amusement.

Arabella accordingly consented to accompany her; and, being told the Ladies
went in an Undress of a Morning, she accommodated herself to the Custom, and
went in a negligent Dress; but instead of a Capuchin, she were something like a
Veil, of black Gauze, which covered almost all her Face, and Part of her Waist,
and gave her a very singular Appearance.

Miss Glanville was too envious of her Cousin's Superiority in point of Beauty,
to inform her of any Oddity in her Dress, which she thought might expose her to
the Ridicule of those that saw her; and Mr. Glanville was too little a Critic
in Ladies Apparel, to be sensible that Arabella was not in the Fashion; and
since every thing she wore became her extremely, he could not choose but think
she dressed admirably well: He handed her therefore, with a great deal of
Satisfaction, into the Pump-Room, which happened to be greatly crowded that
Morning.

The Attention of most Part of the Company was immediately engaged by the
Appearance Lady Bella made. Strangers are here most strictly criticized, and
every new Object affords a delicious Feast of Raillery and Scandal.

The Ladies, alarmed at the Singularity of her Dress, crowded together in
Parties; and the Words, Who can she be? Strange Creature! Ridiculous! and other
Exclamations of the same Kind, were whispered very intelligibly.

The Men were struck with her Figure, veiled as she was: Her fine Stature, the
beautiful Turn of her Person, the Grace and Elegance of her Motion, attracted
all their Notice: The Phenomenon of the Veil, however, gave them great
Disturbance. So lovely a Person seemed to promise the Owner had a Face not
unworthy of it; but that was totally hid from their View: For Arabella, at her
Entrance into the Room, had pulled the Gauze quite over her Face, following
therein the Custom of the Ladies in Clelia, and the Grand Cyrus, who, in mixed
Companies, always hid their Faces with great Care.

The Wits, and Pretty-Fellows, railed at the envious Covering, and compared her
to the Sun obscured by a Cloud; while the Beaux dem'd the horrid Innovation,
and expressed a Fear, lest it should grow into a Fashion.

Some of the wiser Sort took her for a Foreigner; others, of still more
Sagacity, supposed her a Scots Lady, covered with her Played; and a third Sort,
infinitely wiser than either, concluded she was a Spanish Nun, that had escaped
from a Convent, and had not yet quitted her Veil.

Arabella, ignorant of the Diversity of Opinions, to which her Appearance gave
Rise, was taken up in discoursing with Mr. Glanville upon the medicinal Virtue
of the Springs, the Economy of the Baths, the Nature of the Diversions, and
such other Topics, as the Objects around them furnished her with.

In the mean time, Miss Glanville was got amidst a Crowd of her Acquaintance,
who had hardly paid the Civilities of a first Meeting, before they eagerly
inquired, who that Lady she brought with her was.

Miss Glanville informed them, that she was her Cousin, and Daughter to the
deceased Marquis of -- adding with a Sneer, That she had been brought up in the
Country; knew nothing of the World; and had some very peculiar Notions, as you
may see, said she, by that odd kind of Covering she wears.

Her Name and Quality were presently whispered all over the Room: The Men,
hearing she was a great Heiress, found greater Beauties to admire in her
Person: The Ladies, awed by the Sanction of Quality, dropped their Ridicule on
her Dress, and began to quote Examples of Whims full as inexcusable.

One remembered, that Lady J -- T -- alalways wore her Ruffles reversed; that
the Countess of -- went to Court in a Farthingale; that the Duchess of -- sat
astride upon a Horse; and a certain Lady of great Fortune, and nearly allied to
Quality, because she was not dignified with a Title, invented a new one for
herself; and directed her Servants to say in speaking to her, Your Honouress,
which afterward became a Custom among all her Acquaintance; who mortally
offended her, if they omitted that Instance of Respect.
