In which our Heroine reconciles herself to a mortifying Incident, by
recollecting an Adventure in a Romance, similar to her own.

AS soon as the Ladies were come to their Lodgings, Arabella went up to her own
Apartment to meditate upon what had passed, and Miss Glanville retired to dress
for Dinner; while the two Gentlemen, who thought they had great Reason to be
dissatisfied with each other on Account of Lady Bella's Behavior, went to a
Coffee-house, in order to come to some Explanation about it,

Well, Sir, said the Beau, with a sarcastick Air, I am greatly obliged to you
for the Endeavors you have used to ruin me in Lady Bella's Opinion. Rat me, if
it is not the greatest Misfortune in the World, to give occasion for Envy.

Envy, Sir, interrupted Mr. Selvin; I protest I do really admire your great
Skill in Stratagems, but I do not envy you the Possession of it. You have,
indeed, very wittily contrived to put your own Sentiments of that Lady, which
you delivered so freely the other Night, into my Mouth. 'Twas a Masterpiece of
Cunning, indeed; and, as I said before, I admire your Skill prodigiously.

I don't know what you mean, replied Tinsel, y^u talk in Riddles. Did you not
yourself acquaint Lady Bella with the Preference I gave Miss Glanville to her?
What would you propose by such a Piece of Treachery? You have ruined all my
Hopes by it: The Lady resents it excessively, and it is no Wonder, 'faith, it
must certainly mortify her. Upon my Soul, I can never forgive thee for so mal a
propos a Discovery.

Forgive me, Sir, replied Selvin, in a Rage, I don't want your Forgiveness. I
have done nothing unbecoming a Man of Honor. The Lady was so prejudiced by
your Insinuations, that she would not give me Leave to speak; otherwise, I
would have fully informed her of her Mistake, that she might have known how
much she was obliged to you.

So she would not hear thee, interrupted Tinsel laughing, dear Soul, how very
kind was that? 'Faith, I don't know how it is, but I am very lucky, without
deserving to be so. Thou art a Witness for me, Frank, I took no great Pains to
gain this fine Creature's Heart; but it was damned malicious though, to attempt
to make Discoveries. I see she is a little piqu'd, but I Will set all to rights
again with a Billet-doux. I Have an excellent Hand, though I say it, at a
Billet-doux. I never knew one of mine fail in my Life.

Harky, Sir, said Selvin whispering, any more Attempts to shift your Sentiments
upon me, and you shall hear of it. In the mean Time, be assured, I Will clear
myself, and put the Saddle upon the right Horse.

Demme, if thou art not (...) queer Fellow, said Tinsel, endeavoring to hide
his Discomposure at this Threat under a forced Laugh.

Selvin, without making any Reply, retired to write to Arabella; which Tinsel
suspecting, resolved to be before hand with him; and without leaving the
Coffee-house, called for Paper, and wrote a Billet to her, which he dispatched
away immediately.

The Messenger had just got Admittance to Lucy, when another arrived from
Selvin.

They both presented their Letters, but Lucy refused them, saying, her Lady
would turn her away, if she received such Sort of Letters.

Such Sort of Letters, returned Tinsel's Man! Why, do you know what they
contain, then?

To be sure, I do, replied Lucy; they are Love Letters; and my Lady has charged
me never to receive any more.

Well, replied Selvin's Servant, you may take my Letter; for my Master desired
me to tell you, it was about Business of Consequence, which your Lady must be
acquainted with.

Since you assure me it is not a Love-Letter, I Will take it, said Lucy.

And, pray take mine too, said Tinsel's Mercury; for I assure you, it is not a
Love-Letter neither; it is only a Billet-doux.

Are you sure of that, replied Lucy; because I may venture to take it, I fancy,
if its what you say.
