it, I Will take them both up. But what did you call this, pursued she? I must not
forget it, or else my Lady will think it a Love-Letter.

A Billet-doux, said the Man.

Lucy, for fear she should forget it, repeated the Words Billet-doux several
Times as she went up Stairs; but entering her Lady's Apartment, she perceiving
the Letters in her Hand, asked her so sternly, how she durst presume to bring
them into her Presence, that the poor Girl, in her Fright, forgot the Lesson
she had been conning; and endeavoring to recall it into her Memory, took no
Notice of her Lady's Question, which she repeated several times, but to no
Purpose.

Arabella, surpised at her in-attention, reiterated her Commands, in a Tone
somewhat louder than usual; asking her at the same Time, why she did not obey
her immediately?

Indeed, Madam, replied Lucy, your Ladyship would not order me to take back the
Letters, if you knew what they were: They are not Love Letters; I was resolved
to be sure of that before I took them. This, Madam, is a Letter about Business
of Consequence; and the other -- Oh dear! I cannot think what the Man called it!
But it is not a Love-Letter, indeed, Madam.

You are a simple Wench, said Arabella smiling: You may depend upon it, all
Letters directed to me, must contain Matters of Love and Gallantry; and those I
am not permitted to receive. Take them away then immediately. But stay, pursued
she, seeing she was about to obey her, one of them, you say, was delivered to
you as a Letter of Consequence; perhaps i^ is so: Indeed it may contain an
Advertisement of some Design to carry me away. How do I know, but Mr. Selvin,
incited by his Love and Despair, may intend to make such an Attempt. Give me
that Letter, Lucy, I am resolved to open it. As for the other -- yet who knows
but the other may also bring me Warning of the same Danger from another
Quarter. The Pains Mr. Tinsel took to conceal his Passion, nay, almost as I
think, to deny it, amounts to a Proof that he is meditating some Way to make
sure of me. It Is certainly so: Give me that Letter, Lucy; I should be accessory
to their intended Violence, if I neglected this timely Discovery.

Well, cried she, taking one of the Letters, this is exactly like what happened
to the beautiful Princess of Cappadocia; who, like me, in one and the same Day,
received Advice that two of her Lovers intended to carry her off.

As she pronounced these Words Miss Glanville entered the Room, to whom
Arabella immediately recounted the Adventure of the Letters; telling her, she
did not doubt, but they contained a Discovery of some Conspiracy to carry her
away.

And whom does your Ladyship suspect of such a strange Design, pray, said Miss
Glanville smiling?

At present, replied Arabella, the two Cavaliers who walked with us to Day, are
the Persons who seem the most likely to attempt that Violence.

I dare answer for Mr. Tinsel, replied Miss Glanville, he thinks of no such
Thing.

Well, said Arabella, to convince you of your Mistake, I must inform you, that
Mr. Selvin, having the Presumption to begin a Declaration of Love to me on the
Parade this Morning, I reproved him severely for his Want of Respect, and
threatened him with my Displeasure; in the Rage of his Jealousy, at seeing me
treat Mr. Tinsel well, he discovered to me, that he also was as criminal as
himself, in order to oblige me to a severer Usage of him.

So he told you Mr. Tinsel was in Love with you, interrupted Miss Glanville?

He told it me in other Words, replied Arabella; for he said, Mr. Tinsel was
guilty of that Offense, which I resented so severely to him.

Miss Glanville beginning to comprehend the Mystery, with great Difficulty
forbore laughing at her Cousin's Mistake; for she well knew the Offense Mr.
Selvin hinted at, and desirous of knowing what those Letters contained, she
begged her to delay opening them no longer.

Arabella, pleased at her Solicitude, opened one of the Letters; but glancing
her Eye to the Bottom, and seeing the Name of Selvin, she threw it hastily upon
the Table, and averting her Eyes, What a Mortification have I avoided, said
she, that Letter is from Selvin; and questionless, contains an Avowal of his
Crime.

Nay, you must read it, cried Miss Glanville, taking it up; since you have
opened it, its the same Thing: You can never persuade him but you have seen it.
However, to spare your Nicety, I Will read it to you. Which accordingly she did,
and found it as follows.

MADAM,