guilty of the Offense, which, with Justice, occasioned your Resentment this
Morning; but I assure you, nothing was ever more false. My Thoughts of your
Ladyship are very different, and full of the profoundest Respect and
Veneration. I have Reason to suspect Mr. Tinsel is the Person who has thus
endeavored to prejudice me with your Ladyship; therefore I am excusable if I
tell you, that those very Sentiments, too disrespectful to be named, which he
would persuade you are mine, he discovered himself. He then, Madam, is the
Person guilty of that Offense he so falsely lays to the Charge of him, who is,
with the utmost Respect and Esteem,

Madam, Your Ladyship's most obedient, and most humble Servant, F. SELVIN.


How Is this, cried Miss Glanville? Why, Madam, you are certainly mistaken. You
see Mr. Selvin utterly denies the Crime of loving you. He has suffered very
innocently in your Opinion. Indeed, your Ladyship was too hasty in condemning
him.

If what he says be true, replied Arabella, who had been in extreme Confusion,
while a Letter so different from what she expected was reading; I have indeed
unjustly condemned him. Nevertheless, I am still inclined to believe this is
all Artifice; and that he is really guilty of entertaining a Passion for me.

But why should he take so much Pains to deny it, Madam, said Miss Glanville?
Methinks that looks very odd.

Not at all, interrupted Arabella, whose Spirits were raised by recollecting an
Adventure in her Romance, similar to this. Mr. Selvin has fallen upon the very
same Stratagem with Seramenes; who being in Love with the beautiful Cleobuline,
Princess of Corinth, took all imaginable Pains to conceal his Passion, in order
to be near that fair Princess; who would have banished him from her Presence,
had she known he was in Love with her. Nay, he went so far in his
Dissimulation, as to pretend Love to one of the Ladies of her Court; that his
Passion for the Princess might be the less taken notice of. In these Cases
therefore, the more resolutely a Man denies his Passion, the more pure and
violent it is.

Then Mr. Selvin's Passion is certainly very violent, replied Miss Glanville,
for he denies it very resolutely; and I believe none but your Ladyship would
have discovered his Artifice. But shall we not open the other Letter? I have a
strong Notion it comes from Tinsel.

For that very Reason I would not be acquainted with the Contents, replied
Arabella, You see, Mr. Selvin accuses him of being guilty of that Offense which
he denies: I shall doubtless, meet with a Confirmation of his Love in that
Letter. Do not, I beseech you added she, seeing her Cousin preparing to open
the Letter, expose me to the Pain of hearing a presumptuous Declaration of
Love. Nay, pursued she, rising in great Emotion, if you are resolved to
persecute me by reading it, I Will endeavor to get out of the hearing of it.

You shall not, I declare, said Miss Glanville, laughing and holding her, I Will
oblige you to hear it.

I vow, Cousin, said Arabella smiling, you use me just as the Princess
Cleopatra did the fair and wise Antonia. However, if by this you mean to do any
Kindness to the unfortunate Person who wrote that Billet, you are greatly
mistaken; since, if you oblige me to listen to a Declaration of his Crime, you
will lay me under a Necessity to banish him. A Sentence he would have avoided,
while I remained ignorant of it.

To this Miss Glanville made no other Reply than by opening the Billet, the
Contents of which may be found in the following Chapter.
