Contains the Conversation referred to in the last Chapter of the preceding
Book.

MISS Glanville, who with a malicious Pleasure had secretly triumphed in the
Extravagances her beautiful Cousin had been guilty of, was now sensibly
disappointed to find they had had so little Effect on her Father and Brother;
for instead of reflecting upon the Absurdities to which they had been a
Witness, Mr. Glanville artfully pursued the Subject Arabella just before had
been expatiating upon, taking notice frequently of some Observations of hers,
and by a well contrived Repetition of her Words, obliged his Father a second
Time to declare that his Niece had spoken extremely well.

Mr. Glanville taking the Word, launched out into such Praises of her Wit, that
Miss Glanville, no longer able to listen patiently, replied,

'Twas true Lady Bella sometimes said very sensible Things; that 'twas a great
Pity she was not always in a reasonable Way of thinking, or that her Intervals
were not longer --

Her Intervals, Miss, said Glanville, pray what do you mean by that Expression?
--

Why, pray, said Miss Glanville, don't you think my Cousin is sometimes a
little wrong in the Head?

Mr. Glanville at these Words starting from his Chair, took a Turn across the
Room in great Discomposure, then stopping all of a sudden, and giving his
Sister a furious Look -- Charlotte, said he, don't give me Cause to think you
are envious of your Cousin's superior Excellencies --

Envious, repeated Miss Glanville, I envious of my Cousin -- I vow I should
never have thought of that -- Indeed, Brother, you are much mistaken; my
Cousin's superior Excellencies never gave me a Moment's Disturbance -- Though I
must confess her unaccountable Whims have often excited my Pity --

No more of this, Charlotte, interrupted Mr. Glanville, as you value my
Friendship -- No more of it --

Why, really Son, said Sir Charles, my Niece has very strange Whimsies
sometimes. How it came into her Head to think Mr. Tinsel would attempt to carry
her away, I cannot imagine? For after all, he only pressed rather too rudely into
her Chamber, for which, as you see, I have ferbidden his Visits.

That was of a Piece, said Miss Glanville sneeringly to her Brother, with her
asking you if you had made Mr. Tinsel swear upon your Sword, that he would
never again attempt to carry her away; and applauding you for having given him
his Liberty, as the generous Atermens did on the same Occasion.

I would advise you, Charlotte, said Mr. Glanville, not to aim at repeating
your Cousins's Words, till you know how to pronounce them properly.

Oh! that is one of her superior Excellencies, said Miss Glanville.

Indeed, Miss, said Glanville very provokingly, she is superior to you in many
Things; and as much so in the Goodness of her Heart, as in the Beauty of her
Person --

Come, come, Charles, said the Baronet, who observed his Daughter sat swelling
and biting her Lip at this Reproach, personal Reflections are better avoided.
Your Sister is very well, and not to be disparaged; though to be sure, Lady Bella
is the finest Woman I ever saw in my Life.

Miss Glanville was, if possible, more disgusted at her Father's Palliation
than her Brother's Reproaches; and in order to give a Loose to her Passion,
accused Mr. Glanville of a Decrease in his Affection for her, since he had been
in Love with her Cousin; and having found this Excuse for her Tears, very
freely gave vent to them --

Mr. Glanville being softened by this Sight, sacrificed a few Compliments to her
Vanity, which soon restored her to her usual Tranquillity; then turning the
Discourse on his beloved Arabella, pronounced a Panegyric on her Virtues and
Accomplishments of an Hour long; which, if it did not absolutely persuade his
Sister to change her Opinion, it certainly convinced his Father, that his Niece
was not only perfectly well in her Understanding, but even better than most
others of her Sex.

Mr. Glanville had just finished her Eulogium, when Arabella appeared; Joy
danced in his Eyes at her Approach; he gazed upon her with a Kind of conscious
Triumph in his Looks; her consummate Loveliness justifying his Passion, and
being in his Opinion, more than an Excuse for all her Extravagancies.
