In which our Heroine, as we presume, shows herself in two very different
Lights.

ARABELLA, who at her Entrance had perceived some Traces of Uneasiness upon
Miss Glanville's Countenance, tenderly asked her the Cause; to which that young
Lady answering in a cold and reserved Manner, Mr. Glanville, to divert her
Reflections on it, very freely accused himself of having given his Sister some
Offense. To be sure, Brother, said Miss Glanville, you are very vehement in
your Temper, and are as violently carried away about Things of little
Importance as of the greatest; and then, whatever you have a Fancy for, you
love so obstinately.

I am obliged to you, Miss, interrupted Mr. Glanville, for endeavoring to give
Lady Bella so unfavourable an Opinion of me --

I assure you, said Arabella, Miss Glanville has said nothing to your
Disadvantage: For, in my Opinion, the Temperament of great Minds ought to be
such as she represents yours to be. For there is nothing at so great a Distance
from true and heroic Virtue, as that Indifference which obliges some People to
be pleased with all Things or nothing: Whence it comes to pass, that they
neither entertain great Desires of Glory, nor Fear of Infamy; that they neither
love nor hate; that they are wholly influenced by Custom, and are sensible only
of the Afflictions of the Body, their Minds being in a Manner insensible --

To say the Truth, I am inclined to conceive a greater Hope of a Man, who in
the Beginning of his Life is hurried away by some evil Habit, than one that
fastens on nothing: The Mind that cannot be brought to detest Vice, will never
be persuaded to love Virtue; but one who is capable of loving or hating
irreconcilebly, by having, when young, his Passions directed to proper Objects,
will remain fixed in his Choice of what is good. But with him who is incapable
of any violent Attraction, and whose Heart is chilled by a general
Indifference, Precept or Example will have no Force -- And Philosophy itself,
which boasts it has Remedies for all Indispositions of the Soul, never had any
that can cure an indifferent Mind -- Nay, added she, I am persuaded that
Indifference is generally the inseparable Companion of a weak and imperfect
Judgment. For it is so natural to a Person to be carried toward that which he
believes to be good, that if indifferent People were able to judge of Things,
they would fasten on something. But certain it is that this luke-warmness of
Soul, which sends sorth but seeble Desires, sends also but feeble Lights; so
that those who are guilty of it, not knowing any thing clearly, cannot fasten
on any thing with Perseverance.

Mr. Glanville, when Arabella had finished this Speech, cast a triumphing
Glance at his Sister, who had affected great In-attention all the while she had
been speaking. Sir Charles in his Way, expressed much Admiration of her Wit,
telling her, if she had been a Man, she would have made a great Figure in
Parliament, and that her Speeches might have come perhaps to be printed in time.

This Compliment, odd as it was, gave great Joy to Glanville, when the
Conversation was interrupted by the Arrival of Mr. Selvin, who had slipped away
unobserved at the Time that Arabella's Indisposition had alarmed them, and now
came to enquire after her Health; and also if an Opportunity offered to set her
right with Regard to the Suspicions she had entertained of his designing to pay
his Addresses to her.

Arabella, as soon as he had sent in his Name, appeared to be in great
Disturbance; and upon his Entrance, offered immediately to withdraw, telling
Mr. Glanville, who would have detained her, that she found no Place was likely
to secure her from the Persecutions of that Gentleman.

Glanville star'd, and looked strangely perplexed at this Speech; Miss
Glanville smiled, and poor Selvin, with a very silly Look -- hemmed two or three
times, and then with a faultring Accent said, Madam, I am very much concerned
to find your Ladyship resolved to persist in --

Sir, interrupted Arabella, my Resolutions are unalterable. I told you so
before, and am surpised, after the Knowledge of my Intentions, you presume to
appear in my Presence again, from whence I had so positively banished you.

Pray, Niece, said Sir Charles, what has Mr. Selvin done to disoblige you?

Sir, replied Arabella, Mr. Selvin's Offense can admit of no other Reparation
than that which I required of him, which was a voluntary Banishment from my
Presence: And in this pursued she, I am guilty of no more Severity to you, than
the Princess Udosia was to the unfortunate Thrasimedes. For the Passion of this
Prince having come to her Knowledge, notwithstanding the Pains he took to
conceal it, this fair and wise Princess thought it not enough to forbid his
speaking to her, but also banished him from her Presence; laying a peremptory
Command upon him, never to appear before her again till he was perfectly cured
of that unhappy Love he had entertained for her -- Imitate therefore the
meritorious Obedience of this poor Prince, and if that Passion you profess for
me --

How, Sir, interrupted Sir Charles, Do you make Love to my Niece then? --

Sir, replied Mr. Selvin, who was strangely confounded at Arabella's Speech,
though I really admire the Perfections this Lady is possessed of, yet I assure
you, upon my Honor, I never had a Thought of making any Addresses to her; and
I cannot imagine why her Ladyship persists in accusing me of such Presumption.

So formal a Denial after what Arabella had said, extremely perplexed Sir
Charles, and filled Mr. Glanville with inconceivable Shame --

Miss Glanville enjoyed their Disturbance, and full of an ill-natured Triumph,
endeavored to look Arabella into Confusion: But that Lady not being at all
discomposed by this Declaration of Mr. Selvin's, having accounted for it
already, replied with great Calmness,

Sir, It Is easy to see through the Artifice of your disclaiming any Passion for
me -- Upon any other Occasion questionless, you would rather sacrifice your
Life, than consent to disavow these Sentiments, which unhappily for your Peace
you have entertained. At present the Desire of continuing near me, obliges you
to lay this Constraint upon yourself; however you know Thrasimedes fell upon
the same Stratagem to no Purpose. The rigid Udosia saw through the Disguise, and
would not dispense with herself from banishing him from Rome, as I do you from
England --

How, Madam! interrupted Selvin amazed --

Yes, Sir, replied Arabella hastily, nothing less can satisfy what I owe to the
Consideration of my own Glory.

Upon my Word, Madam, said Selvin, half angry, and yet strongly inclined to
laugh, I don't see the Necessity of my quitting my native Country, to satisfy
what you owe to the Consideration of your own Glory. Pray, how does my staying
in England affect your Ladyship's Glory?

To answer your Question with another, said Arabella, Pray how did the Stay of
Thrasimedes in Rome, affect the Glory of the Empress Udosia?

Mr. Selvin was struck dumb with this Speech, for he was not willing to be
thought so deficient in the Knowledge of History, as not to be acquainted with
the Reasons why Thrasimedes should not stay in Rome.

His Silence therefore seeming to Arabella to be a tacit Confession of the
Justice of her Commands, a Sentiment of Compassion for this unfortunate Lover,
intruded itself into her Mind; and turning her bright Eyes, full of a soft
Complacency upon Selvin, who star'd at her as if he had lost his Wits --

I will not, said she, wrong the Sublimity of your Passion for me so much, as
to doubt your being ready to sacrifice the Repose of your own Life to the
Satisfaction of mine: Nor will I do so much Injustice to your Generosity, as to
suppose the Glory of obeying my Commands, will not in some Measure soften the
Rigor of your Destiny -- I know not whether it may be lawful for me to tell
you, that your Misfortune does really cause me some Affliction; but I am
willing to give you this Consolation, and also to assure you, that to whatever
Part of the World your Despair will carry you, the good Wishes and Compassion
of Arabella shall follow you --

Having said this, with one of her fair Hands she covered her Face, to hide the
Blushes which so compassionate a Speech had caused -- Holding the other
extended with a careless Air, supposing he would kneel to kiss it, and bathe it
with his Tears, as was the Custom on such melancholy Occasions, her Head at the
same Time turned another Way, as if reluctantly and with Confusion she granted
this Favor. -- But after standing a Moment in this Posture, and finding her
Hand untouched, she concluded Grief had deprived him of his Senses, and that he
would shortly fall into a Swoon as Thrasimedes did: And to prevent being a
Witness of so doleful a Sight, she hurried out of the Room without once turning
about, and having reached her own Apartment, sunk into a Chair, not a little
affected with the deplorable Condition in which she had left her supposed
miserable Lover.
