In which Mr. Glanville makes an unsuccessful Attempt upon Arabella.

ARABELLA, when she had finished these Words, which banished in part Mr.
Glanville's Confusion, went to her own Apartment, followed by Miss Glanville,
to whom she had made a Sign for that Purpose; and throwing herself into a
Chair, burst into Tears, which greatly surprising Miss Glanville, she pressed her
to tell her the Cause.

Alas! replied Arabella, have I not Cause to think myself extremely unhappy?
The deplorable Death of Mr. Selvin, the Despair to which I see your Brother
reduced, with the fatal Consequences which may attend it, fills me with a
mortal Uneasiness.

Well, said Miss Glanville, your Ladyship may make yourself quite easy as to
both these Matters; for Mr. Selvin is not dead, nor is my Brother in Despair
that I know of.

What do you say, Miss, interrupted Arabella, is not Mr. Selvin dead? Was the
Wound he gave himself not mortal then?

I know of no Wound that he gave himself, not I, said Miss Glanville; what
makes your Ladyship suppose he gave himself a Wound* Lord bless me, what
strange Thoughts come into your Head.

Truly I am rejoiced to hear it, replied Arabella; and in order to prevent the
Effects of his Despair, I Will instantly dispatch my Commands to him to live.

I dare answer for his Obedience, Madam, said Miss Glanville smiling.

Arabella then gave Orders for Paper and Pens to be brought her, and seeing Mr.
Glanville enter the Room, very formally acquainted him with her Intention,
telling him, that he ought to be satisfied with the Banishment to which she had
doomed his unhappy Rival, and not require his Death, since he and nothing to
fear from his Pretensions.

I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, I am perfectly easy upon that
Account: And in order to spare you the Trouble of sending to Mr. Selvin, I may
venture to assure you that he is in no Danger of dying.

It Is impossible, Sir, replied Arabella, according to the Nature of Things,
it is impossible but he must already be very near Death -- You know the Rigor
of my Sentence, you know --

I know, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, that Mr. Selvin does not think himself
under a Necessity of obeying your Sentence; and has the Impudence to question
your Authority for banishing him from his native Country.

My Authority, Sir, said Arabella strangely surpised, is founded upon the
absolute Power he has given me over him.

He denies that, Madam, said Glanville, and says that he neither can give, nor
you exercise an absolute Power over him; since you are both accountable to the
King, whose Subjects you are, and both restrained by the Laws under whose
Sanction you live.

Arabella's apparent Confusion at these Words giving Mr. Glanville Hopes that
he had fallen upon a proper Method to cure her of some of her strange Notions,
he was going to pursue his Arguments, when Arabella looking a little sternly
upon him,

The Empire of Love, said she, like the Empire of Honor, is governed by Laws
of its own, which have no Dependence upon, or Relation to any other.

Pardon me, Madam, said Glanville, if I presume to differ from you. Our Laws
have fixed the Boundaries of Honor as well as those of Love.

How is that possible, replied Arabella, when they differ so widely, that a Man
may be justified by the one, and yet condemned by the other? For Instance,
pursued she, you are not permitted by the Laws of the Land to take away the
Life of any Person whatever; yet the Laws of Honor oblige you to hunt your
Enemy through the World, in order to sacrifice him to your Vengeance. Since it is
impossible then for the same Actions to be at once just and unjust, it must
necessarily follow, that the Law which condemns it, and that which justifies it
is not the same, but directly opposite -- And now, added she, after a little
Pause, I hope I have entirely cleared up that Point to you.

You have indeed, Madam, replied Mr. Glanville, proved to a Demonstration, that
what is called Honor is something distinct from Justice, since they command
Things absolutely opposite to each other.

Arabella without reflecting on this Inference, went on to prove the
independent Sovereignty of Love, which, said she, may be collected from all the
Words and Actions of those Heroes who were inspired by this Passion. We see it
in them, pursued she, triumphing not only over all natural and avowed
Allegiance, but superior even to Friendship, Duty, and Honor itself. This the
Actions of Oroondates, Artaxerxes, Spitridates, and many other illustrious
Princes sufficiently testify.

Love requires a more unlimited Obedience from its Slaves, than any other
Monarch can expect from his Subjects; an Obedience which is circumscribed by no
Laws whatever, and dependent upon nothing but itself.

I shall live, Madam, says the renowned Prince of Scythia to the divine
Statira, I shall live, since it is your Command I should do so; and Death can
have no Power over a Life which you are pleased to take Care of --

Say only that you wish I should conquer, said the great Juba to the
incomparable Cleopatra, and my Enemies will be already vanquished -- Victory
will come over to the Side you favor -- and an Army of a hundred thousand Men
will not be able to overcome the Man who has your Commands to conquer --

How mean and insignificant, pursued she, are the Titles bestowed on other
Monarchs compared with those which dignify the Sovereigns of Hearts, such as
divine Arbitress of my Fate, Visible Divinity, Earthly Goddess, and many others
equally sublime --

Mr. Glanville losing all patience at her obstinate Folly, interrupted her here
with a Question quite foreign to the Subject she was discussing, and soon after
quitting her Chamber, retired to his own, more than ever despairing of her
Recovery.
