In which if the Reader has not anticipated it, he will find an Explanation of
some seeming Inconsistencies in the foregoing Chapter.

THE Countess, charmed with the Wit and good Sense of Arabella, could not
conceal her Admiration, but expressed it in Terms the most obligingly imaginable:
And Arabella, who was excessively delighted with her, returned the Compliments
she made her with the most respectful Tenderness.

In the midst of these mutual Civilities, Arabella in the Style of Romance,
entreated the Countess to favor her with the Recital of her Adventures.

At the Mention of this Request, that Lady conveyed so much Confusion into her
Countenance, that Arabella extremely embarrass'd by it, though she knew not why,
thought it necessary to apologize for the Disturbance she seemed to have
occasioned in her.

Pardon me, Madam, replied the Countess recovering herself, if the uncommoness
of your Request made a Moment's Reflection necessary to (...) that a young Lady
of your Sense and Delicacy could mean no Offense to Decorum by making it. The
Word Adventures carries in it so free and licentious a Sound in the
Apprehensions of People at this Period of Time, that it can hardly with
Propriety be applied to those few and natural Incidents which compose the
History of a Woman of Honor. And when I tell you, pursued she with a Smile,
that I was born and christened, had a useful and proper Education, received the
Addresses of my Lord -- through the Recommendation of my Parents, and married
him with their Consents and my own Inclination; and that since we have lived in
great Harmony together, I have told you all the material Passages of my Life,
which upon Enquiry you will find differ very little from those of other Women
of the same Rank, who have a moderate Share of Sense, Prudence and Virtue.

Since you have already, Madam, replied Arabella blushing, excused me for the
Liberty I took with you, it will be un-necessary to tell you it was grounded
upon the Customs of ancient Times, when Ladies of the highest Rank and
sublimest Virtue, were often exposed to a Variety of cruel Adventures which
they imparted in Confidence to each other, when Chance brought them together.

Custom, said the Countess smiling, changes the very Nature of Things, and what
was honorable a thousand Years ago, may probably be looked upon as infamous
now -- A Lady in the heroic Age you speak of, would not be thought to possess
any great Share of Merit, if she had not been many times carried away by one or
other of her insolent Lovers: Whereas a Beauty in this could not pass through the
Hands of several different Ravishers, without bringing an Imputation on her
Chastity.

The same Actions which made a Man a Hero in those Times, would constitute him
a Murderer in These -- And the same Steps which led him to a Throne Then, would
infallibly conduct him to a Scaffold Now.

But Custom, Madam, said Arabella, cannot possibly change the Nature of Virtue
or Vice: And since Virtue is the chief Characteristick of a Hero, a Hero in the
last Age will be a Hero in this -- Though the Natures of Virtue or Vice cannot be
changed, replied the Countess, yet they may be mistaken; and different
Principles, Customs, and Education, may probably change their Names, if not
their Natures.

Sure, Madam, said Arabella a little moved, you do not intend by this Inference
to prove Oroondates, Artaxerxes, Juba, Artaban, and the other Heroes of
Antiquity, bad Men?

Judging them by the Rules of Christianity, and our present Notions of Honor,
Justice, and Humanity, they certainly are, replied the Countess.

Did they not possess all the necessary Qualifications of Heroes, Madam, said
Arabella, and each in a superlative Degree? -- Was not their Valor invincible,
their Generosity unbounded, and their Fidelity inviolable?

It cannot be denied, said the Countess, but that their Valor was invincible;
and many thousand Men less courageous than themselves, felt the fatal Effects
of that invincible Valor, which was perpetually seeking after Occasions to
exert itself. Oroondates gave many extraordinary Proofs of that unbounded
Generosity so natural to the Heroes of his Time. This Prince being sent by the
King his Father, at the Head of an Army, to oppose the Persian Monarch, who had
unjustly invaded his Dominions, and was destroying the Lives and Properties of
his Subjects; having taken the Wives and Daughters of his Enemy Prisoners, had
by these Means an Opportunity to put a Period to a War so destructive to his
Country: Yet out of a Generosity truly heroic, he released them immediately
without any Conditions; and falling in Love with one of those Princesses,
secietly quitted his Father's Court, resided several Years in that of the Enemy
of his Father and Country, engaged himself to his Daughter, and when the War
broke out again between the two Kings, fought furiously against an Army in
which the King his Father was in Person, and shed the Blood of his future
Subjects without Remorse; though each of those Subjects, we are told, would have
sacrificed his Life to save that of their Prince, so much was he beloved* Such
are the Actions which immortalize the Heroes of Romance, and are by the Authors
of those Books styled glorious, godlike, and divine. Yet judging of them as
Christians, we shall find them impious and base, and directly opposite to our
present Notions of moral and relative Duties.

It Is certain therefore, Madam, added the Contess with a Smile, that what was
Virtue in those Days, is Vice in ours: And to form a Hero according to our
Notions of 'em at present, it is nessary to give him Qualities very different
from Oroondates.

The secret Charm in the Countenance, Voice, and Manner of the Countess, joined
to the Force of her reasoning, could not fail of making some Impression on the
Mind of Arabella; but it was such an Impression as came far short of
Conviction. She was surpised embarrass'd, perplexed, but not convinced.
Heroism, romantic Heroism, was deeply rooted in her Heart; it was her Habit of
thinking, a Principle imbibed from Education. She could not separate her Ideas
of Glory, Virtue, Courage, Generosity, and Honor, from the false
Representations of them in the Actions of Oroondates, Juba, Artaxerxes, and the
rest of the imaginary Heroes. The Countess's Discourse had raised a Kind of
Tumult in her Thoughts, which gave an Air of Perplexity to her lovely Face, and
made that Lady apprehensive she had gone too far, and lost that Ground in her
Esteem, which she had endeavored to acquire by a Conformity to some of her
Notions and Language. In this however, she was mistaken; Arabella felt a
Tenderness for her that had already the Force of a long contracted Friendship,
and an Esteem little less than Veneration.

When the Countess took Leave, the Professions of Arabella, though delivered in
the Language of Romance, were very sincere and affecting, and were returned
with an equal Degree of Tenderness by the Countess, who had conceived a more
than ordinary Affection for her.

Mr. Glanville who could have almost worshipped the Countess for the generous
Design be saw she had entertained, took an Opportunity as he handed her to her
Chair, to entreat in a Manner as earnestly as polite, that she would continue
the Happiness of her Acquaintance to his Cousin; which with a Smile of mingled
Dignity and Sweetness she assured him of.
