Which concludes Book the Eighth.

MR. Glanville at his Return to the Dining Room, finding Arabella retired, told
his Father in a Rapture of Joy, that the charming Countess would certainly make
a Convert of Lady Bella.

Methinks, said the Baronet, she has as strange Whims in her Head as my Niece.
Ad's-heart, what a deal of Stuff did she talk about! A Parcel of Heroes as she
calls them, with confounded hard Names -- In my Mind she is more likely to make
Lady Bella worse than better.

Mr. Glanville, a little vexed at his Father's Mis-apprehension, endeavored
with as much Delicacy as he could, to set him right with Regard to the
Countess; so that he brought him at last to confess she managed the Thing very
well.

The Countess, who had resolved to take Arabella openly into her Protection,
was thinking on Means to engage her to appear at the Assembly, whither she
proposed to accompany her in a modern Dress. But her good Intentions toward
our lovely Heroine were suspended by the Account she received of her Mother's
Indisposition, which commanded her immediate Attendance on her at her Seat in
--

Her sudden Departure gave Arabella an extreme Uneasiness, and proved a cruel
Disappointment to Mr. Glanville, who had founded all his Hopes of her Recovery
on the Conversation of that Lady.

Sir Charles having Affairs that required his Presence in London, proposed to
his Niece the leaving Bath in a few Days, to which she consented; and
accordingly they set out for London in Arabella's Coach and Six, attended by
several Servants on Horseback, her Women having been sent away before in the
Stage.

Nothing very remarkable happened during this Journey, so we shall not trouble
our Readers with several small Mistakes of Arabella's such as her supposing a
neat Country Girl who was riding behind a Man, to be some Lady or Princess in
Disguise, forced away by a Lover she hated, and entreating Mr. Glanville to
attempt her Rescue; which occasioned some little Debate between her and Sir
Charles, who could not be persuaded to believe it was as she said, and forbid
his Son to meddle in other Peoples Affairs. Several of these Sort of Mistakes,
as we said before, we omit, and will therefore if our Reader pleases, bring our
Heroine without further Delay to London.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE Female QUIXOTE. BOOK IX.