In which is related an admirable Adventure.

MISS Glanville whose Spirits were greatly exhilerated at their Entrance into
London, that Seat of Magnificence and Pleasure, congratulated her Cousin upon
the Entertainment she would receive from the new and surprising Objects which
every Day for a considerable Time would furnish her with; and ran over the
Catalogue of Diversions with such a Volubility of Tongue, as drew a gentle
Reprimand from her Father, and made her keep a sullen Silence till they were
set down in St. James's Square, the Place of their Residence in Town.

Sir Charles having ordered his late Lady's Apartment to be prepared for the
Accommodation of his Niece; as soon as the first Civilities were over, she
retired to her Chamber, where she employed herself in giving her Women
Directions for placing her Books, of which she had brought a moderate Quantity
to London, in her Closet.

Miss Glanville as soon as she had dispatched away some hundred Cards to her
Acquaintance, to give them Notice she was in Town, attended Arabella in her own
Apartment; and as they sat at the Tea she begun to regulate the Diversions of
the Week, naming the Drawing Room, Park, Concert, Ranelagh, Lady -- Assembly,
the Duchess of Rant, Vaux-Hall, and a long etc. of Visits; at which Arabella,
with an Accent that expressed her Surprise, asked her, If she supposed she
intended to stay in Town three or four Years --

Law, Cousin, said Miss Glanville, all this is but the Amusement of a few Days.

Amusement, do you say, replied Arabella, methinks it seems to be the sole
Employment of those Days: And what you call the Amusement, must of Necessity be
the Business of Life.

You are always so grave, Cousin, said Miss Glanville, one does not know what
to say to you. However, I shall not press you to go to Public Places against your
Inclination, yet you will condescend to receive a few Visits, I suppose?

Yes, replied Arabella, and if among the Ladies whom I shall see, I find any
like the amiable Countess of --, I shall not scruple to enter into the most
tender Amity with them.

The Countess of -- is very well, to be sure, said Miss Glanville, yet I don't
know how it is, she does not suit my Taste -- She is very particular in a great
many Things, and knows too much for a Lady, as I heard my Lord Fribble say one
Day: Then she is quite unfashionable: She hates Cards, keeps no Assembly, is
seen but seldom at Public Places; and in my Opinion, as well as in a great
many others, is the dullest Company in the World. I Am sure I met her at a Visit
a little before I went down to your Seat, and she had not been a quarter of an
Hour in the Room, before she set a whole Circle of Ladies a yawning.

Arabella, though she had a sincere Contempt for her Cousin's Manner of thinking,
yet always politely concealed it; and vexed as she was at her Sneers upon the
Countess, she contented herself with gently defending her, telling her at the
same Time, that till she met with a Lady who had more Merit than the Countess
possessed, she should always possess the first Place in her Esteem.

Arabella, who had from Youth adopted the Resentments of her Father, refused to
make her Appearance at Court, which Sir Charles gently intimated to her; yet
being not wholly divested of the Curiosity natural to her Sex, she condescended
to go incog. to the Gallery on a B^ll Night, accompanied by Mr. Glanville and
his Sister, in order to behold the Splendour of the British Court.

As her Romances had long familiariz'd her Thoughts to Objects of Grandeur and
Magnificence, she was not so much struck as might have been expected, with
those that now presented themselves to her View. Nor was she a little
disappointed to find that among the Men she saw none whose Appearance came up
to her Ideas of the Air and Port of an Artaban, Oroondates, or Juba; or any of
the Ladies, who did not in her Opinion, fall short of the Perfections of Elisa,
Mandana, Statira, etc. 'Twas remarkable too, that she never inquired how often
the Princesses had been carried away by captivated Monarchs, or how many
Victories the King's Sons had gained; but seemed the whole Time she was there
to have suspended all her Romantic Ideas of Glory, Beauty, Gallantry, and Love.

Mr. Glanville was highly pleased with her composed Behavior, and a Day or two
after entreated her to allow him the Honor of showing her what was remarkable
and worthy of her Observation in this great Metropolis. To this she also
consented, and for the greater Privacy began their Travels in a hired Coach.

Part of several Days were taken up in this Employment; but Mr. Glanville had
the Mortification to find she was full of Allusions to her Romances upon every
Occasion, such as her asking the Person who shows the Armoury at the Tower, the
Names of the Knights to whom each Suit belonged, and wondering there were no
Devices on the Shields or Plumes of Feathers in the Helmets: She observed that
the Lion Lysimachus killed, was according to the History of that Prince, much
larger than any of those she was showed in the Tower, and also much fiercer.
Took Notice that St. Paul's was less magnificent in the Inside, than the Temple
in which Cyrus, when he went to Mandana, heard her return Thanks for his
supposed Death: Inquired if it was not customary for the King and his whole
Court to sail in Barges upon the Thames, as Augustus used to do upon the Tyber,
whether they had not Music and Collations in the Park, and where they
celebrated the Justs and Tournaments.

The Season for Vaux-Hall being not yet over, she was desirous of once seeing a
Place, which by the Description she had heard of it, greatly resembled the
Gardens of Lucullus at Rome, in which the Emperor, with all the Princes and
Princesses of his Court were so nobly entertained, and where so many gallant
Conversations had passed among those admirable Persons.

The Singularity of her Dress, for she was covered with her Veil, drew a Number
of Gazers after her, who pressed round her with so little Respect, that she was
greatly embarrass'd, and had Thoughts of quitting the Place, delightful as she
owned it, immediately, when her Attention was wholly engrossed by an Adventure
in which she soon interested herself very deeply.

An Officer of Rank in the Sea Service had brought his Mistress disguised in a
Suit of Man's or rather Boy's Clothes, and a Hat and Feather, into the Gardens.
The young Creature being a little intoxicated with the Wine she had taken too
freely, was thrown so much off her Guard as to give Occasion to some of the
Company to suspect her Sex; and a gay Fellow, in order to give them some
Diversion at her Expense, pretending to be affronted at something she said,
drew his Sword upon the disguised Fair One, which so alarmed her, that she
shrieked out, She was a Woman, and ran for Protection to her Lover, who was so
dis^rder'd with Liquor, that he was not able to defend her.

Miss Glanville ever curious and inquisitive, demanded the Cause why the
Company ran in Crowds to that particular Spot; and received for Answer, That a
Gentleman had drawn his Sword upon a Lady disguised in a Man's Habit.

Oh Heavens! cried Arabella, this must certainly be a very notable Adventure.
The Lady has doubtless some extraordinary Circumstances in her Story, and happily
upon Enquiry, her Misfortunes will be found to resemble those which obliged the
beautiful Aspasia to put on the same Disguise, who was by that Means murdered
by the cruel Zenodorus in a Fit of Jealousy at the Amity his Wife expressed for
her. But can I not see this unfortunate Fair One, added she, pressing in spite
of Mr. Glanville's Entreaties through the Crowd -- I may happily be able to afford
her some Consolation.

Mr. Glanville finding his Persuasions were not regarded, followed her with
very little Difficulty: For her Veil falling back in her Hurry, she did not
mind to replace it, and the Charms of her Face, joined to the Majesty of her
Person, and Singularity of her Dress, attracting every Person's Attention and
Respect, they made Way for her to pass, not a little surpised at the extreme
Earnestness and Solemnity that appeared in her Countenance upon an Event so
diverting to every one else.

The disguised Lady whom she was endeavoring to approach, had thrown herself
upon a Bench in one of the Boxes, trembling still with the Apprehension of the
Sword, though her Antagonist was kneeling at her Feet, making Love to her in
Mock-Heroicks for the Diversion of the Company.

Her Hat and Peruke had fallen off in her Fright, and her Hair which had been
turned up under it, hung now loosely about her Neck, and gave such an
Appearance of Woe to a Face, which notwithstanding the Paleness that Terror had
overspread it with, was really extremely pretty, that Arabella was equally
struck with Compassion and Admiration of her.

Lovely Unknown, said she to her with an Air of extreme Tenderness, though I am a
Stranger both to your Name and History, yet your Aspect persuading me your
Quality is not mean, and the Condition and Disguise in which I behold you,
showing that you are Unfortunate, permit me to offer you all the Assistances in
my Power, seeing that I am moved thereto by my Compassion for your Distress,
and that Esteem which the Sight of you must necessarily inspire.

Mr. Glanville was struck dumb with Confusion at this strange Speech, and at
the Whispers and Scoffs it occasioned among the Spectators. He attempted to
take hold of her Hand in order to lead her away, but she disengaged herself
from him with a Frown of Displeasure; and taking no Notice of Miss Glanville,
who whispered with great Emotion, Lord, Cousin, how you expose yourself! pressed
nearer to the Beautiful Disguised, and again repeated her Offers of Service.

The Girl being perfectly recovered from her Intoxication by the Fright she had
been in, gazed upon Arabella with a Look of extreme Surprise: Yet being moved
to respect by the Dignity of her Appearance, and strange as her Words seemed to
be by the obliging Purport of them, and the affecting Earnestness with which
they were delivered, she rose from her Seat and thanked her, with an Accept
full of Regard and Submission.

Fair Maid, said Arabella, taking her Hand, let us quit this Place, where your
Discovery may probably subject you to more Dangers: If you will be pleased to
put yourself into my Protection, and acquaint me with the History of your
Misfortunes; I have Interest enough with a valiant Person who shall undertake
to free you from your Persecutions, and re-establish the Repose of your Life.

The kneeling Hero, who as well as every one else that were present, had gazed
with Astonishment at Arabella during all this Passage, perceiving she was about
to rob him of the disguised Fair, seized hold of the Hand she had at Liberty,
and swore he would not part with her.

Mr. Glanville almost mad with Vexation, endeavored to get Arabella away.

Are you mad, Madam, said he in a Whisper, to make all this Rout about a
Prostitute? Do you see how every body stares at you? What will they think --
For Heavens sake let us be gone.

What, Sir, replied Arabella in a Rage, Are you base enough to leave this
admirable Creature in the Power of that Man, who is questionless her Ravisher;
and will you not draw your Sword in her Defense?

Hey day! cried the Sea-Officer, waked out of his stupid Dose by the Clamor
about him: What Is the Matter here -- What are you doing? Where Is my Lucy?
Zoons! Sir, said he to the young Fellow who held her, What Business have you
with my Lucy? And uttering a dreadful Oath, drew out his Sword, and staggered
toward his gay Rival, who observing the Weakness of his Antagonist, flourished
with his Sword to show his Courage and frighten the Ladies, who all ran away
screaming. Arabella taking Miss Glanville under the Arm, cried out to Mr.
Glanville as she left the Place, to take Care of the distressed Lady, and while
the two Combatants were disputing for her, to carry her away in Safety.

But Mr. Glanville without regarding this Injunction, hastened after her; and
to pacify her, told her the Lady was rescued by her favorite Lover, and
carried off in Triumph.

But are you sure, said Aabella, it was not some other of her Ravishers who
carried her away, and not the Person whom she has happily favored with her
Affection? May not the same Thing have happened to her, as did to the beautiful
Candace, Queen of Ethiopia; who while two of her Ravishers were fighting for
her, a third whom she took for her Deliverer, came and carried her away.

But she went away willingly, I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glanville: Pray
don't be in any Concern about her --

If she went away willingly with him, replied Arabella, it is probable it may
not be another Ravisher: And yet if this Person that rescued her happened to be
in Armor, and the Vizor of his Helmet down, she might be mistaken as well as
Queen Candace.

Well, well, he was not in Armor, Madam, said Glanville almost beside himself
with Vexation at her Folly --

You seem to be disturbed, Sir, said Arabella a little surpised at his peevish
Tone: Is there any Thing in this Adventure which concerns you? Nay, now I
remember, you did not offer to defend the Beautiful Unknown. I am not willing
to impute your In-action upon such an Occasion, to Want of Courage or
Generosity; perhaps you are acquainted with her History, and from this
Knowledge refused to engage in her Defense.

Mr. Glanville perceiving the Company gather from all Parts to the Walk they
were in, told her he would acquaint her with all he knew concerning the
disguised Lady when they were in the Coach on their Return Home; and Arabella
impatient for the promised Story, proposed to leave the Gardens immediately,
which was gladly complied with by Mr. Glanville, who heartily repented his
having carried her thither.
