A very mysterious Chapter.

ARABELLA, who impatiently longed for the Hour of meeting the fair Princess,
with whom she was extremely delighted, consulted her Watch so often, and
discovered so much Restlessness and Anxiety, that Mr. Glanville began to be
surpised; and the more, as she peremptorily commanded him not to attend her in
her Evening Walk. This Prohibition, which, though he durst not dispute, he
secretly resolved to disobey; and as soon as she set out for the Park with her
usual Attendants, he slipped out by a Backdoor, and keeping her in his Sight,
himself unseen, she ventured to watch her Motions.

As he had expected to unravel some great Mystery, he was agreeably
disappointed to find she continued her Walk in the Park with great Composure;
and though she was soon joined by the imaginary Princess, yet conceiving her to
be some young Lady, with whom she had commenced an Acquaintance at Richmond,
his Heart was at Rest; and for fear of displeasing her, he took a contrary Path
from that she was in, that he might not meet her, yet resolved to stay till he
thought she would be inclined to return, and then show himself, and conduct her
Home. A Solicitude for which he did not imagine she need be offended.

The two Ladies being met, after reciprocal Compliments, the Princess entreated
Arabella to relate her Adventures; who not being willing to violate the Laws of
Romance, which require an unbounded Confidence upon these Occasions, began very
succinctly to recount the History of her Life; which, as she managed it,
contained Events almost as Romantic and Incredible as any in her Romances;
winding them up with a Confession that she did not hate Mr. Glanville, whom she
acknowledged to be one of the most faithful and zealous of Lovers.

Cynecia with a Sigh, congratulated her upon the Fidelity of a Lover, who by
her Description, was worthy the Place he possessed in her Esteem: And
expressing a Wish, that she could see, unobserved by him, this gallant and
generous Person, Arabella, who that Moment espied him at a Distance, yet
advancing toward them, told her, with a Blush that overspread all her Face,
That her Curiosity might be satisfied in the Manner she wished, for, yonder,
added she is the Person we have been talking of.

Cynecia, at these Words, looking toward the Place where her fair Friend had
directed; no sooner cast her Eyes upon Mr. Glanville, than giving a loud Cry,
she sunk into the Arms of Arabella, who, astonished and perplexed as she was,
eagerly held them out to support her.

Finding her in a Swoon, she dispatched. Lucy, who was near her, to look for
some Water to throw in her Face; but that Lady breathing a deep Sigh, opened
her languishing Eyes, and fixing a melancholy Look upon Arabella,

Ah! Madam, said she, wonder not at my Affliction and Surprise, since in the
Person of your Lover I behold the ungrateful Ariamenes.

Oh Heavens! my fair Princess, replied Arabella, What is it you say? Is it
possible Glanville can be Ariamenes?

He, cried the afflicted Princess with a disordered Accent, He whom I now
behold! and whom you call Glanville, was once Ariamenes, the perjured, the
ungrateful Ariamenes. Adieu, Madam, I cannot bear this Sight; I will hide
myself from the World for ever; nor need you fear a Rival or an Enemy in the
unfortunate Cynecia, who if possible, will cease to love the unfaithful
Ariamenes, and will never hate the beautiful Arabella.

Saying this, without giving her Time to answer, she took hold of her Confidant
by the Arm, and went away with so much Swiftness, that she was out of sight
before Arabella was enough recovered from her Astonishment to be able to
entreat her Stay.

Our charming Heroine, ignorant till now of the true State of her Heart, was
surpised to find it assaulted at once by all the Passions which attend
disappointed Love. Grief, Rage, Jealousy, and Despair made so cruel a War in
her gentle Bosom, that unable either to express or to conceal the strong
Emotions with which she was agitated, she gave Way to a violent Burst of Tears,
leaning her Head upon Lucy's Shoulder, who wept as heartily as her Lady, though
ignorant of the Cause of her Affliction.

Mr. Glanville, who was now near enough to take Notice of her Posture, came
running with eager Heart to see what was the matter; when Arabella, roused from
her Extacy of Grief by the Sound of his Steps, lifted up her Head, and seeing
him approach,

Lucy, cried she, trembling with the Violence of her Resentment, Tell that
Traitor to keep out of my Sight. Tell him, I forbid him ever to appear before
me again. And, tell him, added she, with a Sigh that shook her whole tender
Frame, All that Blood in his Body is too little to wash away his Guilt, or to
pacify my Indignation.

Then hastily turning away, she ran toward her other Attendants, who were at
some Distance; and joining her Women, proceeded directly Home.

Mr. Glanville, amazed at this Action, was making after her as fast as he
could, when Lucy crossing in his Way, cried out to him to stop.

My Lady, said she, bid me tell you, Traitor --

Hey day! interrupted Glanville, What the Devil does the Girl mean?

Pray Sir, said she, let me deliver my Message: I shall forget if you speak to
me till I have said it all -- Stay, let me see, What comes next?

No more Traitor, I hope, said Glanville.

Nor, Sir, said Lucy; but there was something about washing in Blood, and you
must keep out of her Sight, and not appear before the Nation -- Oh dear! I have
forgot it half: My Lady was in such a piteous Taking, I forgot it, I believe,
as soon as she said it. What shall I do? --

No Matter, said Glanville, I Will overtake her, and ask --

No, no, Sir, said Lucy, Pray don't do that, Sir, my Lady will be very angry: