A short Chapter indeed, but full of Matter.

RICHMOND was now a Scene of the utmost Confusion and Distress. Arabella's
Fever was risen to such a Height, that she was given over by the Physicians;
and Sir George's Wounds, though not judged mortal at first, yet by the great
Effusion of Blood had left him in so weak a Condition, that he was thought to
be in great Danger.

Sir Charles, almost distracted with the Fears of the Consequences of Sir
George's Death, entreated his Son to quit the Kingdom; but Mr. Glanville,
protesting he would rather die than leave Arabella in that Illness, he was
obliged to give Bail for his Appearance, in Case Sir George died: This Affair,
notwithstanding all Endeavors to prevent it, having made a great Noise.

Poor Sir Charles, oppressed as he was with the Weight of all these Calamities,
was yet obliged to labor incessantly to keep up the Spirits of his Son and
Daughter. The settled Despair of the one, and the silent swelling Grief of the
other, cut him to the Heart. He omitted no Arguments his Paternal Affection
suggested to him, to moderate their Affliction. Mr. Glanville often endeavored
to assume a Composure he was very far from feeling, in order to satisfy his
Father. But Miss Glanville, looking upon herself to be the Cause of Sir
George's Misfortune, declared, She should be miserable all her Life, if he died.

Arabella in her lucid Intervals, being sensible of her Danger, prepared for
Death, with great Piety and Constancy of Mind, having solemnly assured Mr.
Glanville of her Forgiveness, who would not at that Time enter into an
Explanation of the Affair which had given her Offense for fear of perplexing
her. She permitted his Presence often in her Chamber, and desired with great
Earnestness the Assistance of some worthy Divine in her Preparations for Death.
The Pious and Learned Doctor -- at Sir Charles's Intimation of his Niece's
Desire, came constantly twice a Day to attend her. Her Fever, by a favorable
Crisis, and the great Skill of her Physicians, left her in a Fortnight; but
this violent Distemper had made such a Ravage in her delicate Constitution, and
reduced her so low that there seemed very little Probability of her Recovery.
Doctor --, in whom her unfeigned Piety, her uncommon Firmness of Mind, had
created a great Esteem and Tenderness for her, took all Opportunities of
comforting, exhorting, and praying by her. The Occasion of her Illness being
the Subject of every body's Conversation at Richmond, he gently hinted it to
her, and urged her to explain her Reasons for so extravagant an Action.

In the Divine Frame Arabella was then in, this Action appeared to her rash and
vainglorious, and she acknowledged it to be so to her pious Monitor: Yet she
related the Motives which induced her to it, the Danger she was in of being
carried away, the Parity of her Circumstances then with Clelia, and her emulous
Desire of doing as much to preserve her Honor as that renowned Roman Lady did
for hers.

The good Doctor was extremely surpised at this Discourse: He was beginning to
think her again delirious; but Arabella added to this Account such sensible
Reasoning on the Nature of that Fondness for Fame, which prompted her to so
rash an Undertaking, that the Doctor left her in strange Embarrassment, not
knowing how to account for a Mind at once so enlightened, and so ridiculous.

Mr. Glanville, meeting him as he came out of her Chamber, the Doctor took this
Opportunity to acknowledge the Difficulties Arabella's inconsistent Discourse
had thrown him into. Mr. Glanville taking him into his own Apartment, explained
the Nature of that seeming Inconsistency, and expatiated at large upon the
Disorders Romances had occasioned in her Imagination; several Instances of
which he recounted, and filled the Doctor with the greatest Astonishment and
Concern. He lamented pathetically the Ruin such a ridiculous Study had brought
on so noble a Mind; and assured Mr. Glanville, he would spare no Endeavors to
rescue it from so shocking a Delusion.

Mr. Glanville thanked him for his good Design, with a Transport which his
Fears of his Cousin's Danger almost mingled with Tears; and the Doctor and he
agreed to expect for some few Days longer an Alteration for the better in the
Health of her Body, before he attempted the Cure of her Mind. Mr. Glanville's
extreme Anxiety had made him in Appearance neglect the repentant Sir George,
contenting himself with constantly sending twice a Day to enquire after his
Health, but had not yet visited him.

No sooner had the Physicians declared that Arabella was no longer in Danger,
than his Mind being freed from that tormenting Load of Suspense under which it
had labored while her Recovery was yet doubful, he went to Sir George's
Chamber, who by reason of his Weakness, though he was also upon the Recovery,
still kept his Bed.

Sir George, though he ardently wished to see him, yet conscious of the Injuries
he had both done and designed him, could not receive his Visit without extreme
Confusion: But entering into the Cause of their Quarrel, as soon as he was able
to speak, he freely acknowledged his Fault, and all the Steps he had taken to
supplant him in Arabella's Affection.

Mr. Glanville understanding by this Means, that he had bribed a young Actress
to personate a Princess forsaken by him; and had taught her all that Heap of
Absurdity with which she had imposed upon Arabella, as has been related,
desired only by Way of Reparation, That when his Cousin was in a Condition to
be spoken to upon that Subject, he would condescend to own the Fraud to her;
which Sir George faithfully promising, an Act of Oblivion passed on Mr.
Glanville's Side for all former Injuries, and a solemn Assurance from Sir
George of inviolable Friendship for the future. An Assurance, however, which
Mr. Glanville would willingly have dispensed with: For though not of a vindictive
Temper, it was one of his Maxims, That a Man who had once betrayed him, it
would be an Error in Policy ever to trust again.
