"Well then (proceeded my examiner) how many sacraments are there?" -- To which
I replied, "Two." -- "What are they? (said he.)" I answered, "Baptism and the
Lord's Supper." -- "And so you would explode confirmation and marriage
altogether? (said Oakhum) I thought this fellow was a rank Roman." -- The
clerk, though he was bred under an attorney, could not relrain from blushing at
this blunder, which he endeavored to conceal, by observing, that these decoys
would not do with me who seemed to be an old offender. -- He went on, with
asking if I believed in transubstantiation; but I treated the notion of the
real presence with such disrespect that his patron was scandalized at my
impiety, and commanded him to proceed to the plot. -- Whereupon this miserable
pettifogger told me, there was great reason to suspect me of being a spy on
board; and that I had entered into a conspiracy with Thomson and others not yet
detected, against the life of captain Oakhum. -- To support which accusation,
they adduced the testimony of our boy, who declared he had often heard the
deceased Thomson and me whispering together, and could distinguish the words,
"Oakhum, rascal, poison, pistol," by which it appeared, we did intend to use
sinister means to accomplish his destruction. That the death of Thomson seemed
to confirm this conjecture, who, either feeling the stings of remorse, for
being engaged in such a horrid confederacy, or fearing a discovery, by which he
must have infallibly suffered an ignominious death, had put a fatal period to
his own existence. -- But what established the truth of the whole, was a book
in cipher found among my papers, which exactly tallied with one found in his
chest, after his disappearance: This, he observed, was a presumption very near
proof positive, and would determine any jury in christendom to find me guilty.
-- In my own defense, I alleged that I had been dragged on board at first very
much against my inclination, as I could prove by the evidence of some people
now in the ship; consequently could have no design of becoming spy at that
time; and ever since had been entirely out of the reach of any correspondence
that could justly intail that suspicion upon me; -- and as for conspiring
against my captain's life, it could not be supposed that any man in his right
wits would harbor the least thought of such an undertaking, which he could not
possibly perform without certain infamy and ruin to himself, even if he had all
the inclination in the world. -- That allowing the boy's evidence to be true
(which I affirmed was false and malicious) nothing conclusive could be gathered
from a few incoherent words: Neither was the fate of Mr. Thomson a circumstance
more favorable for the charge; for I had in my pocket, a letter which too well
explained that mystery, in a very different manner from that which was
supposed: With these words I produced the following letter, which Jack Rattlin
brought to me the very day after Thomson disappeared; and told me it was
committed to his care by the deceased, who made him promise not to deliver it
sooner. The clerk taking it out of my hand, read aloud the contents, which were
these:

DEAR FRIEND,
I AM so much oppressed with the fatigue I daily and nightly undergo, and the
barbarous usage of doctor Mackshane, who is bent on your destruction, as well
as mine, that I am resolved to free myself from this miserable life, and before
you receive this, shall be no more. I could have wished to die in your good
opinion, which I am afraid I shall forfeit by the last act of my life; but if
you cannot acquit me, I know you will at least preserve some regard for the
memory of an unfortunate young man who loved you. -- I recommend it to you, to
beware of Mackshane, whose revenge is implacable. -- I wish all prosperity to
you and Mr. Morgan, to whom pray offer my last respects, and beg to be
remembered as your unhappy friend and countryman.

WILLIAM THOMSON.


This letter was no sooner read, than Mackshane, in a transport of rage,
snatched it out of the clerk's hands, and tore it into a thousand pieces,
saying, it was a villainous forgery, contrived and executed by myself. -- The
captain and clerk declared themselves of the same opinion, notwithstanding I
insisted on having the remains of it compared to other writings of Thomson,
which they had in possession; and I was ordered to answer the last article of
my accusation, namely, the book of ciphers found among my papers. -- "That is
easily done (said I.) What you are pleased to call ciphers, are no other than
the Greek characters, in which, for my amusement, I kept a diary of every thing
remarkable that has occurred to my observation since the beginning of the
voyage, till the day on which I was put in irons; and the same method, was
practiced by Mr. Thomson who copied mine." -- "A very likely story! (cried
Mackshane) what occasion was there for using Greek characters, if you were not
afraid of discovering what you had wrote? -- but, what do you talk of Greek
characters? -- Do You think I am so ignorant of the Greek language, as not to
distinguish its letters from these, which are no more Greek than Chinese? No,
no, I will not give up my knowledge of the Greek for you, nor none that ever
came from your country." So saying, with an unparalleled effronterie, he
repeated some gibberish, which by the sound seemed to be Irish, and made it
pass for Greek with the captain, who looking at me with a contemptible sneer,
exclaimed, "Ah ha! have you caught a tartar?" I could not help smiling at the
consummate assurance of this Hibernian, and offered to refer the dispute to any
body on board, who understood the Greek alphabet: Upon which Morgan was brought
back, and being made acquainted with the affair, took the book and read a whole
page in English, without hesitation, deciding the controversy in my favor. --
The doctor was so far from being out of countenance at this, that he affirmed
Morgan was in the secret, and repeated from his own invention. -- Oakhum said,
"Ay, ay, I see they are both in a story," and dismissed my fellowmate to his
cock-loft, although I proposed that he and I should read and translate
separately, any chapter or verse in the Greek-testament in his possession, by
which it would appear whether we or the surgeon spoke truth. -- Not being
endued with eloquence enough to convince the captain that there could be no
juggle nor confederacy in this expedient, I begged to be examined by some
unconcerned person on board, who understood Greek: Accordingly the whole ship's
company, officers and all, were called upon deck, among whom it was proclaimed,
that if any of them could speak Greek, he or they so qualified, should ascend
the quarter deck immediately. -- After some pause two fore-mast-men came up and
professed their skill in that language, which (they said) they acquired during
several voyages to the Levant, among the Greeks of the Morea. The captain
exulted much in this declaration, and put my journal book into the hands of one
of them, who heartily owned he could neither read nor write; the other
acknowledged the same degree of ignorance, but pretended to speak the Greek
lingo with any man on board; and addressing himself to me, pronounced some
sentences of a barbarous corrupted language, which I did not understand. -- I
asserted that the modern Greek was as different from that spoke and written by
the ancients, as the English used now from the old Saxon spoke in the time of
Hengist; and as I had only learned the true original tongue, in which Homer,
Pindar, the evangelists and other Great men of antiquity wrote, it could not be
supposed that I should know any thing of an imperfect Gothic dialect that rose
on the ruins of the former, and scarce retained any traces of the old
expression. -- But if doctor Mackshane, who pretended to be master of the Greek
language, could maintain a conversation with these seamen, I would retract what
I had said, and be content to suffer any punishment he should think proper to
inflict. -- I had no sooner uttered these words, than the surgeon knowing one
of the fellows to be his countryman, accosted him in Irish, and was answered in
the same brogue; then a dialogue ensued between them, which they affirmed to be
Greek, after having secured the secrecy of the other tar, who had his cue in
the language of the Morea from his companion, before they would venture to
assert such an intrepid falsehood. -- "I thought (said Oakhum) we should
discover the imposture at last, -- Let the rascal be carried back to his
confinement. -- I find he must dangle." -- Having nothing further to urge in my
own behalf, before a court so prejudiced with spite, and fortified with
ignorance against truth, I suffered myself to be reconducted peaceably to my
fellow-prisoner, who hearing the particulars of my trial, lifted up his hands
and eyes to heaven, and uttered a dreadful groan; and not daring to disburthen
his thoughts to me by speech, lest he might be overheard by the sentinel, burst
forth into a Welsh song, which he accompanied with a thousand contortions of
face and violent gestures of body.

CHAP. XXXI.
I discover a subornation against me, by means of a quarrel between two of the
evidences; in consequence of which, I am set at liberty, and prevail upon
Morgan to accept of his freedom on the same terms -- Mackshane's malice -- we
arrive at Jamaica, from whence in a short time we beat up to Hispaniola, in
conjunction with the West-Indian squadron -- we take in water, sail again, and
arrive at Carthagena -- reflections on our conduct there.

MEAN while, a quarrel happening between the two modern Greeks, the one to be
revenged of the other, came and discovered to us the mystery of Mackshane's
dialogue, as I have explained it above. This detection coming to the ears of
the doctor, who was sensible that (now we were in sight of Jamaica) we should
have an opportunity of clearing ourselves before a court martial, and at the
same time, of making his malice and ignorance conspicuous, he interceeded for
us with the captain so effectually, that in a few hours we were set at liberty,
and ordered to return to our duty. -- This was a happy event for me, my whole
body being blistered by the sun, and my limbs benumbed for want of motion: But
I could not persuade the Welchman to accept of this indulgence, he persisting
in his obstinacy to remain in irons until he should be discharged by a
courtmartial, which he believed would also do him justice on his enemies; at
length, I represented to him the precarious issue of a trial, the power and
interest of his adversaries, and flattered his revenge with the hope of
wreaking his resentment with his own hands upon Mackshane after our return to
England: This last argument had more weight with him than all the rest, and
prevailed upon him to repair with me to the cockpit, which I no sooner entered,
than the idea of my departed friend presented itself to my remembrance, and
filled my eyes with tears. -- We discharged from our mess the boy who had acted
so perfidiously, notwithstanding his tears, entreaties, and professions of
penitence for what he had done; but not before he had confessed that the
surgeon had bribed him to give evidence against us, with a pair of stockings
and a couple of old check shirts, which his servant had since plundered him of.

The keys of our chests and lockers being sent to us by the doctor, we detained
the messenger until we had examined the contents; and my fellow-mate finding
all his Cheshire cheese consumed to a crust, his brandy exhausted, and his
onions gone, was seized with a fit of choler, which he discharged on
Mackshane's man in oaths and execrations, threatening to prosecute him as a
thief. -- The fellow swore in his turn that he never had the keys in his
possession till that time, when he received them from his master, with orders
to deliver them to us. -- "As Got is my judge (cried Morgan) and my salfation,
and my witness, whosoever has pilfered my provisions, is a lousy, beggarly,
rascally knave! and by the soul of my grandsire! I will impeach, and accuse,
and indict him of a roppery, if I did but know who he is." -- Had this happened
at sea where we could not repair the loss, in all probability, this descendant
of Cadwallader would have lost his wits entirely: but when I observed, how easy
it would be to make up for this paultry misfortune, he became more calm, and
reconciled himself to the occasion. -- A little while after, the surgeon came
into the birth, under pretense of taking something out of the medicine-chest,
and with a smiling aspect, wished us joy of our deliverance, which (he said) he
had been at great pains to obtain of the captain, who was very justly incensed
at our behavior; but he (the doctor) had passed his word for our conduct in
time to come, and he hoped we should give him no cause to repent of his
kindness. -- He expected (no doubt) an acknowledgment from us for this
pretended piece of service, as well as a general amnesty of what was past; but
he had to do with people who were not quite so apt to forgive injuries as he
imagined, or to forget that if our deliverance was owing to his mediation, our
calamity was occasioned by his malice; I therefore sat silent while my
companion answered, "Ay, ay, it is no matter -- Got knows the heart -- there is
a time for all things, as the wise man says, there is a time for throwing away
stones, and a time to gather them up again." -- He seemed to be disconcerted at
this reply, and went away in a pet, muttering something about "Ingratitude" and
"Fellows," which we did not think fit to take any notice of.

Our fleet having joined another that waited for us, lay at anchor about a
month in the harbor of Port Royal in Jamaica, during which time something of
consequence was certainly transacted, notwithstanding the insinuations of some
who affirmed we had no business at all in that place -- that in order to take
the advantage of the season proper for our enterprise, the West-Indian
squadron, which had previous notice of our coming, ought to have joined us at
the west end of Hispaniola with necessary stores and refreshments, from whence
we could have sailed directly to Carthagena, before the enemy could put
themselves in a good posture of defense, or indeed have an inkling of our
design. Be this as it will, we sailed from Jamaica, and in ten days or a
fortnight, beat up against the wind as far as the isle of Vache, with an
intention, as was said, to attack the French fleet, then supposed to be lying
near that place; but before we arrived they had sailed for Europe, having first
dispatched an advice-boat to Carthagena with an account of our being in these
seas, as also of our strength and destination. -- We loitered here some days
longer, taking in wood, and brackish water, in the use whereof, however, our
admiral seemed to consult the health of the men, by restricting each to a quart
a day. -- At length we set sail, and arrived in a bay to the windward of
Carthagena, where we came to an anchor, and lay at our ease ten days longer. --
Here again, certain malicious people take occasion to blame the conduct of
their superiors, by saying, this was not only throwing away time, which was
very precious considering the approach of the rainy season, but also giving the
Spaniards time to recollect themselves, and recover from the consternation they
were thrown into at the approach of an English fleet, at least three times as
numerous as ever appeared in that part of the world before. But if I might be
allowed to give my opinion of the matter, I would ascribe this delay to the
generosity of our chiefs, who scorned to take any advantage that fortune might
give them, even over an enemy. At last, however, we weighed, and anchored again
somewhat nearer the harbour's mouth, where we made shift to land our marines,
who encamped on the beach, in despite of the enemy's shot, which knocked a good
many of them on the head. -- This piece of conduct in choosing a camp under the
walls of an enemy's fortification, which I believe never happened before, was
practiced, I presume, with a view of accustoming the soldiers to stand fire,
who were not as yet much used to discipline, most of them having been taken
from the plough-tail a few months before. -- This again has furnished matter
for censure against the Ministry, for sending a few raw recruits on such an
important enterprise, while so many veteran regiments lay inactive at home: But
surely our governors had their reasons for so doing, which possibly may be
disclosed with other secrets of the deep. Perhaps they were loath to risk their
best troops on such desperate service; or, may be the colonels and field
officers of the old corpse, who, generally speaking, enjoyed their commissions
as sine-cures or pensions, for some domestic services tendered to the court,
refused to embark in such a dangerous and precarious undertaking; for which, no
doubt, they are to be much commended.

CHAP. XXXII.
Our land forces being disembarked, erect a faschine battery -- our ship is
ordered with four more, to batter the fort of Bocca Chica -- Mackshane's
cowardice -- the chaplain's phrenzy -- honest Rattlin lases one hand -- his
heroism and reflections on the battle -- Crampley's behavior to me during the
heat of the fight.

OUR forces being landed and stationed as I have already mentioned, set about
erecting a faschine battery to cannonade the principal fort of the enemy, and
in something more than three weeks, it was ready to open. That we might do the
Spaniards as much honor as possible, it was determined in a council of war,
that five of our largest ships should attack the fort on one side, while the
battery plied it on the other, strengthened with two mortars, and twenty-four
cohorns.

Accordingly, the signal for our ship to engage, among others, was hoisted, we
being advertised the night before, to make every thing clear for that purpose:
and in so doing, a difference happened between captain Oakhum and his
well-beloved cousin and counselor Mackshane, which had well nigh terminated in
an open rupture. -- The doctor, who had imagined there was no more danger of
being hurt by the enemy's shot in the cockpit than in the center of the earth,
was lately informed that a surgeon's mate had been killed in that place, by a
cannon-ball from two small forts, that were destroyed before the disembarkation
of our soldiers; and therefore insisted upon having a platform raised for the
convenience of the sick and wounded, in the after-hold, where he deemed himself
more secure than on the deck above. -- The captain, offended at this
extraordinary proposal, accused him of pusilanimity, and told him there was no
room in the hold for such an occasion; or if there was, he could not expect to
be indulged more than the rest of the surgeons of the navy, who used the
cockpit for that purpose: Fear rendering Mackshane obstinate, he persisted in
his demand, and showed his instructions, by which it was authorized: The
captain swore these instructions were dictated by a parcel of lazy poltroons
who were never at sea; but was obliged to comply, and sent for the carpenter to
give him orders about it: But before any such measure could be taken, our
signal was thrown out, and the doctor compelled to trust his carcass in the
cockpit, where Morgan and I were busy in putting our instruments and dressings
in order.

Our ship, with the others destined for this service, immediately weighed, and
in less than half an hour came to an anchor before the castle of Bocca Chica,
with a spring upon our cable. -- The cannonading (which indeed was terrible!)
began. The surgeon, after having crossed himself, fell flat on the deck; and
the chaplain and purser, who were stationed with us, in quality of assistants,
followed his example, while the Welchman and I sat upon a chest looking at one
another with great discomposure, scarce able to refrain from the like
prostration. -- And that the reader may know, it was not a common occasion that
alarmed us thus, I must inform him of the particulars of this dreadful din that
astonished us. The fire of the Spaniards proceeded from Bocca Chica mounting
eighty-four great guns, beside a mortar and small arms; from fort St. Joseph,
mounting thirty-six; from two faschine batteries, mounting twenty; and from
four men of war, mounting sixty-four guns each. -- This was answered by us,
from our land battery, mounting twenty-one cannon; our bomb battery, mounting
two mortars, and twenty-four cohorns, and five men of war, two of eighty, and
three of seventy guns, which fired without intermission. -- We had not been
many minutes engaged, when one of the sailors brought another on his back to
the cockpit, where he tossed him down like a bag of oats, and pulling out his
pouch, put a large chew of tobacco in his mouth, without speaking a word;
Morgan immediately examined the condition of the wounded man, and cried, "As I
shall answer now, the man is as tead as my greatgrandfather." -- "Dead (said
his comrade) he may be dead now, for ought I know, but I Will be d -- mn'd if he
was not alive when I took him up." -- So saying, he was about to return to his
quarters, when I bid him carry the body along with him and throw it overboard.
-- "D -- n the body! (said he) I think it is fair enough if I take care of my
own." -- My fellow-mate snatching up the amputation knife, pursued him halfway
up the cockpit ladder, crying, "You lousy rascal, is this the churchyard, or
the charnel-house, or the sepulcher, or the Golgotha of the ship?" -- but was
stopped in his carreer by one calling, "Yo ho, avast there -- scaldings." --
"Scaldings! (answered Morgan) Got knows it is hot enough indeed: -- who are
you?" -- "Here Is one (replied the voice.") and I immediately knew it to be that
of my honest friend Jack Rattlin, who coming toward me, told me, with great
deliberation, he was come to be dock'd at last, and discovered the remains of
one hand which had been shattered to pieces with grape shot. -- I lamented with
unfeigned sorrow his misfortune, which he bore with heroic courage, observing,
that every shot had its commission: It was well it did not take him in the
head; or if it had, what then? he should have died bravely, fighting for his
king and country: Death was a debt which every man owed, and must pay now as
well as another time. -- I was much pleased and edified with the maxims of this
sea-philosopher, who endured the amputation of his left hand without shrinking;
the operation being performed (at his request) by me, after Mackshane, who was
with difficulty prevailed to lift his head from the deck, had declared there
was a necessity for his losing the limb. -- While I was employed in dressing
the stump, I asked Jack's opinion of the battle, who shaking his head, frankly
told me, he believed we should do no good; "For why, because instead of
dropping anchor close under shore, where we should have had to deal with one
corner of Bocca Chica only, we had opened the harbor, and exposed ourselves to
the whole fire of the enemy from their shipping and fort St. Joseph, as well as
from the castle we intended to canonade; that besides, we lay at too great a
distance to damage the walls, and three parts in four of our shot did not take
place; for there was scarce any body on board, who understood the pointing of a
gun. -- Ah! God help us! (continued he) if your kinsman lieutenant Bowling had
been here, we should have had other-guess-work." -- By this time our patients
had increased to such a degree, that we did not know which to begin with; and
the first mate plainly told the surgeon, that if he did not get up immediately,
and perform his duty, he would complain of his behavior to the admiral, and
make application for his warrant. -- This effectually roused Mackshane, who was
never ^eaf to an argument in which he thought his interest was concerned; he
therefore rose up, and in order to strengthen his resolution, had recourse more
than once to a case-bottle of rum which he freely communicated to the chaplain
and purser, who had as much need of such extraordinary inspiration as himself:
Being thus supported, he went to work, and arms and legs were hewed down
without mercy. -- The fumes of the liquor mounting into the parson's brain,
conspired with his former agitation of spirits, to make him quite delirious; he
stripped himself to the skin, and besmearing his body with blood, could scarce be
withheld from running upon deck in that condition. Jack Rattlin, scandalized
at this deportment, endeavored to allay his transports with reason; but
finding all he said ineffectual, and great confusion occasioned by his
frolicks, he knocked him down with his right hand, and by threats kept him
quiet in that state of humiliation. -- But it was not in the power of rum to
elevate the purser, who sat on the floor wringing his hands, and cursing the
hour in which he left his peaceable profession of a brewer in Rochester, to
engage in such a life of terror and disquiet. -- While we diverted ourselves at
the expense of this poor devil, a shot happened to take us between wind and
water, and its course being through the purser's store-room, made a terrible
havoc and noise among the jars and bottles in its way, and disconcerted
Mackshane so much, that he dropped his scalpel, and falling down on his knees,
pronounced his Paternoster aloud; the purser fell backward and lay without
sense or motion; and the chaplain grew so outrageous, that Rattlin with one
hand, could not keep him under; so that we were obliged to confine him in the
surgeon's cabin, where he was no doubt guilty of a thousand extravagancies. --
Much about this time, my old antagonist Crampley came down, with express orders
(as he said) to bring me up to the quarterdeck, to dress a slight wound the
captain had received by a splinter. His reason for honoring me in particular
with this piece of service, being that in case I should be killed or disabled
by the way, my death or mutilation would be of less consequence to the ship's
company, than that of the doctor or his first mate. -- At another time,
perhaps, I might have disputed this order, to which I was not bound to pay the
least regard; but as I thought my reputation depended upon my compliance, I was
resolved to convince my rival that I was no more afraid than he, to expose
myself to danger. -- With this view, I provided myself with dressings, and
followed him immediately to the quarter deck, through a most infernal scene of
slaughter, fire, smoke, and uproar! Captain Oakhum, who leaned against the
mizen mast, no sooner (...) me approach in my shirt, with the sleeves t^ed up
to my armpits, and my hands dyed with blood, than he signified his displeasure
by a frown, and asked why the doctor himself did not come? I told him Crampley
had singled me out, as if by his express command; at which he seemed surprised,
and threatened to punish the midshipman for his presumption, after the
engagement: In the mean time, I was sent back to my station, and ordered to
tell Mackshane, that the captain expected him immediately. -- I got safe back
and delivered up my commission to the doctor, who flatly refused to quit the
post assigned to him by his instructions. Hereupon, Morgan, who (I believe) was
jealous of my reputation for courage, undertook the affair, and ascended with
great intrepidity. -- The captain finding the surgeon obstinate, suffered
himself to be dressed, and swore he would confine Mackshane as soon as that
service should be over.

CHAP. XXXIII.
A breach being made in the walls, our soldiers give the assault, take the
place without opposition -- our sailors at the same time become masters of all
the other strengths near Bocca Chica, and take possession of the harbor -- the
good consequence of this success -- we move nearer the town -- find two forts
deserted, and the channel blocked up with sunk vessels; which however, we find
means to clear -- land our soldiers at La Quinta -- repulse a body of militia
-- attack the castle of St. Lazar, and are forced to retreat with great loss --
the remains of our army are re-imbarked -- an effort of the admiral to take the
Town -- the economy of our expedition described.

HAVING cannonaded the fort, during the space of four hours, we were all
ordered to slip our cables, and sheer off; but next day the engagement was
renewed, and continued from the morning till the afternoon, when the enemy's
fire from Bocca Chica slackened, and toward evening was quite silenced. -- A
breach being made on the other side, by our land-battery, large enough to admit
a middle sized baboon, provided he could find means to climb up to it; our
general proposed to give the assault that very night, and actually ordered a
detachment on that duty: Providence stood our friend upon this occasion, and
put it into the hearts of the Spaniards to abandon the fort, which might have
been maintained by resolute men, to the day of judgment against all the force
we could exert in the attack. -- And while our soldiers took possession of the
enemy's ramparts, without resistance, the same good luck attended a body of
sailors, who made themselves masters of fort St. Joseph, the faschine
batteries, and one Spanish man of war; the other three being burnt or sunk by
the foe, that they might not fall into our hands. -- The taking of these forts,
in the strength of which the Spaniards chiefly confided, made us masters of the
outward harbor, and occasioned great joy among us; as we laid our accounts
with finding little or no opposition from the town: And indeed, if a few great
ships had sailed up immediately, before they had recovered from the confusion
and despair that our unexpected success had produced among them, it is not
impossible that we might have finished the affair to our satisfaction, without
any more bloodshed: but this our Heroes disdained, as a barbarous insult over
the enemy's distress; and gave them all the respite they could desire, in order
to recollect themselves. -- In the mean time, Mackshane taking the advantage of
this general exultation, waited on our captain, and pleaded his own cause so
effectually, that he was re-established in his good graces; and as for
Crampley, there was no more notice taken of his behavior toward me, during
the action. -- But of all the consequences of the victory, none was more
grateful than plenty of fresh water, after we had languished five weeks on the
allowance of a purser's quart per diem for each man, in the Torrid Zone, where
the sun was vertical, and the expense of bodily fluid so great, that a gallon
of liquor could scarce supply the waste of twentyfour hours; especially, as our
provision consisted of putrid salt beef, to which the sailors gave the name of
Irish horse; salt pork of New England, which though neither fish nor flesh,
savoured of both; bread from the same country, every biscuit whereof, like a
piece of clock work, moved by its own internal impulse, occasioned by the
myriads of insects that dwelt within it; and butter served out by the gill,
that tasted like train-oil thickened with salt. Instead of small-beer, each man
was allowed three half quarterns of brandy or rum, which was distributed every
morning, diluted with a certain quantity of his water, without either sugar or
fruit to render it palatable, for which reason this composition, was by the
sailors not unaptly styled Necessity. Nor was this limitation of simple element
owing to a scarcity of it on board, there being at this time water enough in
the ship for a voyage of six months, at the rate of half a gallon per day to
each man: But this fast must (I suppose) have been injoined by way of penance
on the ship's company for their sins; or rather with a view to mortify them
into a contempt of life, that they might thereby become more resolute and
regardless of danger. How simply then do those people argue, who ascribe the
great mortality among us, to our bad provision and want of water; and affirm,
that a great many valuable lives might have been saved, if the useless
transports had been employed in fetching fresh stock, turtle, fruit, and other
refreshments, from Jamaica and other adjacent islands, for the use of the army
and fleet! seeing, it is to be hoped, that those who died went to a better
place, and those who survived were the more easily maintained. -- After all, a
sufficient number remained to fall before the walls of St. Lazar, where they
behaved like their own country mastifs, which shut their eyes, run into the
jaws of a bear, and have their heads crushed for their valor.

But to return to my narration: After having put garrisons into the forts we
had taken, and re-imbarked our soldiers and artillery, which detained us more
than a week, we ventured up to the mouth of the inner harbor, guarded by a
large fortification on one side, and a small redoubt on the other, both of
which were deserted before our approach, and the entrance of the harbor
blocked up by several old galleons that the enemy had sunk in the channel. --
We made shift, however, to open a passage for some ships of war, that favored
the second landing of our troops at a place called La Quinta, not far from the
town, where, after a faint resistance from a body of Spaniards, who opposed
their disembarkation, they encamped with a design of besieging the castle of
St. Lazar, which overlooked and commanded the city: Whether our renowned
general had no body in his army who knew how to approach it in form, or that he
trusted entirely to the fame of his arms, I shall not determine; but certain it
is, a resolution was taken in a council of war, to attack the place with
musquetry only, which was put in execution, and succeeded accordingly; the
enemy giving them such an hearty reception, that the greatest part of the
detachment took up their everlasting residence on the spot. -- Our chief not
relishing this kind of complaisance in the Spaniards, was wise enough to
retreat on board with the remains of his army, which, from eight thousand able
men landed on the beach near Bocca Chica, was now reduced to fifteen hundred
fit for service. -- The sick and wounded were squeezed into certain vessels,
which thence obtained the name of hospital ships, though methinks they scarce
deserved such a creditable title, seeing none of them could boast of either
surgeon, nurse or cook; and the space between decks was so confined, that the
miserable patients had not room to sit upright in their beds. Their wounds and
stumps being neglected, contracted filth and putrefaction, and millions of
maggots were hatched amid the corruption of their sores. This inhuman disregard
was imputed to the scarcity of surgeons; though it is well known, that every
great ship in the fleet could have spared one at least for this duty, which
would have been more than sufficient to remove this shocking inconvenience:
But, perhaps, the general was too much of a gentleman to ask a favor of this
kind from his fellow-chief, who on the other hand, would not derogate so far
from his own dignity, as to offer such assistance unasked; for I may venture to
affirm, that by this time, the Demon of discord with her sooty wings, had
breathed her influence upon our counsels; and it might be said of these great
men, (I hope they will pardon the comparison) as of Caesar and Pompey, the one
could not brook a superior, and the other was impatient of an equal: So that
between the pride of one, and insolence of another, the enterprise miscarried,
according to the proverb, "Between two stools the backside falls to the
ground." -- Not that I would be thought to liken any public concern to that
opprobrious part of the human body, although I might with truth assert, if I
durst use such a vulgar idiom, that the nation did hang an a -- se at its
disappointment on this occasion; neither would I presume to compare the
capacity of our heroic leaders to any such wooden convenience as a joint-stool
or a close-stool; but only signify by this simile, the mistake the people
committed in trusting to the union of two instruments that were never joined.

A day or two after the attempt on St. Lazar, the admiral ordered one of the
Spanish men of war we had taken, to be mounted with sixteen guns, and manned
with detachments from our great ships, in order to batter the town;
accordingly, she was towed into the inner harbor in the nightime, and moored
within half a mile of the walls, against which she began to fire at daybreak;
and continued about four hours exposed to the opposition of at least forty
pieces of cannon, which at length obliged our men to set her on fire, and get
off as well as they could, in their boats. -- This piece of conduct afforded
matter of speculation to all the wits, either in the army or the navy, who were
at last fain to acknowledge it a stroke of policy above their comprehension. --
Some entertained such an irreverent opinion of the admiral's understanding, as
to think he expected the town would surrender to his floating battery of
sixteen guns: Others imagined his sole intention was to try the enemy's
strength, by which he would be able to compute the number of great ships that
would be necessary to bring the Spaniards to a capitulation: But this last
conjecture soon appeared groundless, in as much as no ships of any kind
whatever were afterward employed on that service. -- A third sort swore, that
no other cause could be assigned for this undertaking, than that which induced
Don Quixote to attack the windmill. A fourth class (and that the most numerous,
though without doubt, composed of the sanguine and malicious) plainly taxed
this commander with want of honesty as well as sense; and alleged that he
ought to have sacrificed private pique to the interest of his country; that
where the lives of so many brave fellow citizens were concerned, he ought to
have concurred with the general, without being solicited or even desired,
toward their preservation and advantage; that if his arguments could not
dissuade him from a desperate enterprise, it was his duty to render it as
practicable as possible, without running extreme hazard; that this could have
been done, with a good prospect of success, by ordering five or six large ships
to batter the town while the land forces stormed the castle, by this means, a
considerable diversion would have been made in favor of those troops, who in
their march to the assault and in the retreat, suffered much more from the town
than from the castle; that the inhabitants seeing themselves vigorously
attacked on all hands, would have been divided, distracted and confused, and in
all probability, unable to resist the assailants. -- But all these suggestions
surely proceed from ignorance and malevolence, or else the admiral would not
have found it such an easy matter, at his return to England, to justify his
conduct to a ministry at once so upright and discerning. -- True it is, that
those who undertook to vindicate him on the spot, asserted, there was not water
enough for our great ships near the town; though this was a little unfortunately
urged, because there happened to be pilots in the fleet perfectly well
acquainted with the soundings of the harbor, who affirmed there was water
enough for five eighty gun ships to lie abreast in, almost up at the very
walls. -- The disappointments we suffered, occasioned an universal dejection,
which was not at all alleviated by the objects that daily and hourly
entertained our eyes, nor by the prospect of what must inevitably happen, if we
remained much longer in this place. -- Such was the economy in some ships,
that, rather than be at the trouble of interring the dead, their commanders
ordered their men to throw the bodies overboard, many withouteither ballast or
winding sheet; so that numbers of human carcasses floated in the harbor, until
they were devoured by sharks and carrion crows; which afforded no agreeable
spectacle to those who survived. -- At the same time the wet season began,
during which, a deluge of rain falls from the rising to the setting of the sun,
without intermission; and that no sooner ceases, than it begins to thunder and
lighten with such continual flashing, that one can see to read a very small
print by the illumination.

CHAP. XXXIV.
An epidemick fever rages among us -- we abandon our conquests -- I am seized
with the distemper; write a petition to the captain, which is rejected -- I am
in danger of suffocation through the malice of Crampley; and relieved by a
sergeant -- my fever increases -- the chaplain wants to confess me -- I obtain
a favorable crisis -- Morgan's affection for me proved -- the behavior of
Mackshane and Crampley toward me -- Captain Oakhum is removed into another
ship with his beloved doctor -- our new captain described -- an adventure of
Morgan.

THE change of the atmosphere, occasioned by this phoenomenon, conspired with
the stench that surrounded us, the heat of the climate, our own constitutions
impoverished by bad provision, and our despair, to introduce the bilious fever
among us, which raged with such violence that three fourths of those whom it
invaded, died in a deplorable manner; the color of their skin, being by the
extreme putrefaction of their juices, changed into that of soot.

Our conductors finding things in this situation, perceived it was high time to
relinquish our conquests, which we did, after having rendered their artillery
useless and blown up their walls with gunpowder. -- Just as we sailed from
Bocca Chica on our return to Jamaica, I found myself threatened with the
symptoms of this terrible distemper; and knowing very well that I stood no
chance for my life, if I should be obliged to lie in the cockpit, which by this
time, was grown intolerable even to people in health, by reason of the heat and
unwholesome smell of decayed provision; I wrote a petition to the captain
representing my case, and humbly imploring his permission to lie among the
soldiers in the middle-deck, for the benefit of the air: But I might have
spared myself the trouble; for this humane commander refused my request, and
ordered me to continue in the place allotted for the surgeon's mates, or else
be contented to lie in the hospital, which, by the bye, was three degrees more
offensive and more suffocating than our own birth below. -- Another in my
condition, perhaps, would have submitted to his fate, and died in a pet; but I
could not brook the thought of perishing so pitifully, after I had weathered so
many gales of hard fortune: I therefore, without minding Oakhum's injunction,
prevailed upon the soldiers (whose good will I had acquired) to admit my
hammock among them; and actually congratulated myself upon my comfortable
situation, which Crampley no sooner understood, than he signified to the
captain, my contempt of his orders; and was invested with power to turn me down
again into my proper habitation. -- This barbarous piece of revenge, incensed
me so much against the author, that I vowed, with bitter imprecations, to call
him to a severe account, if ever it should be in my power; and the agitation of
my spirits increased my fever to a violent degree. -- While I lay gasping for
breath in this infernal abode, I was visited by a sergeant, the bones of whose
nose I had reduced and set to rights, after they had been demolished by a
splinter during our last engagement: He being informed of my condition, offered
me the use of his birth in the middledeck, which was enclosed with canvas and
wellaired by a port-hole that remained open within it. -- I embraced this
proposal with joy, and was immediately conducted to the place, where I was
treated, while my illness lasted, with the utmost tenderness and care by this
grateful halberdier, who had no other bed for himself than a hencoop, during
the whole passage -- Here I lay and enjoyed the breeze, notwithstanding of
which, my malady gained ground, and at length my life was despaired of, though
I never lost hopes of recovery, even when I had the mortification to see, from
my cabin window, six or seven thrown overboard every day, who died of the
same distemper. This confidence, I am persuaded, conduced a good deal to the
preservation of my life, especially, when joined to another resolution I took
at the beginning, namely, to refuse all medicine, which I could not help
thinking co-operated with the disease, and instead of resisting putrefaction,
promoted a total degeneracy of the vital fluid. -- When my friend Morgan,
therefore, brought his diaphoretic boluses, I put them in my mouth, it is true,
but without any intention of swallowing them; and when he went away, spit them
out, and washed my mouth with water gruel: I seemingly complied in this manner,
that I might not affront the blood of Caractacus, by a refusal which might have
intimated a diffidence of his physical capacity; for he acted as my physician;
doctor Macshane never once enquiring about me, or even knowing where I was. --
When my distemper was at the height, Morgan thought my case desperate, and
after having applied a blister to the nape of my neck, squeezed my hand,
bidding me, with a woeful countenance, recommend myself to Got and my reteemer;
then taking his leave, desired the chaplain to come and administer some
spiritual consolation to me; but before he arrived, I had made shift to rid
myself of the troublesome application the Welchman had bestowed on my back. --
The parson having felt my pulse, enquired into the nature of my complaints,
hemmed a little, and began thus: "Mr. Random, God out of his infinite mercy
has been pleased to visit you with a dreadful distemper, the issue of which no
man knows. -- You may be permitted to recover, and live many days on the face
of the earth: and, which is more probable, you may be taken away and cut off in
the flower of your youth: It is incumbent on you, therefore, to prepare for the
great change, by repenting sincerely of your sins; of this there cannot be a
greater sign, than an ingen'ous confession, which I conjure you to make,
without hesitaton or mental reservation; and when I am convinced of your
sincerity, I will then give you such comfort as the situation of your soul will
admit of. Without doubt, you have been guilty of numberless transgressions, to
which youth is subject, as swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, and adultery; tell
me therefore, without reserve, the particulars of each, especially of the last,
that I may be acquainted with the true state of your conscience: For no
physician will prescribe for his patient until he knows the circumstances of
his disease." As I was not under any apprehensions of death, I could not help
smiling at the doctor's inquisitive remonstrance, which I told him savoured
more of the Roman than of the Protestant church, in recommending auricular
confession, a thing, in my opinion, not at all necessary to salvation, and
which, for that reason, I declined. -- This reply disconcerted him a little;
however, he explained away his meaning, in making learned distinctions between
what was absolutely necessary, and what was only convenient; then proceeded to
ask what religion I professed: I answered, that I had not as yet considered the
difference of religions, consequently had not fixed on any one in particular,
but that I was bred a Presbyterian. -- At this word the chaplain discovered
great astonishment, and said, he could not comprehend how a Presbyterian was
entitled to any post under the English government. -- Then he asked if I had
ever received the Sacrament, or taken the oaths; to which I replying in the
negative, he held up his hands, assured me he could do me no service, wished I
might not be in a state of reprobation; and returned to his mess-mates, who
were making merry in the ward-room, round a table well stored with bumbo Bumbo
is a liquor composed of rum, sugar, water and nutmeg.
and wine. -- This insinuation, terrible as it was, had not such an effect upon
me, as the fever, which, soon after he had left me, grew outrageous; I began to
see strange chimeras, and concluded myself on the point of becoming delirious:
But before that happened, was in great danger of suffocation, upon which I
started up in a kind of frantic fit, with an intention to plunge myself into
the sea, and as my friend the sergeant was not present, would certainly have
cooled myself to some purpose, had I not perceived a moisture upon my thigh, as
I endeavored to get out of my hammock: The appearance of this revived my
hopes, and I had reflection and resolution enough to take the advantage of this
favorable symptom, by tearing the shirt from my body and the sheets from my
bed, and wrapping myself in a thick blanket, in which enclosure, for about a
quarter of an hour, I felt the pains of hell; but it was not long before I was
recompensed for my suffering by a profuse sweat, that bursting from the whole
surface of my skin, in less than two hours, relieved me from all my complaints,
except that of weakness; and left me as hungry as a kite. -- I enjoyed a very
comfortable nap, after which I was regaling myself with the agreeable reverie
of my future happiness, when I heard Morgan, on the outside of the curtain, ask
the sergeant, if I was still alive? "Alive! (cried the other) God forbid he
should be otherwise! he has lain quiet these five hours, and I do not choose to
disturb him, for sleep will do him great service." -- "Ay, (said my
fellow-mate) he sleeps so sound, (look you) that he will never waken till the
great trump plows. -- Got be merciful to his soul. -- He has paid his debt,
like an honest man. -- Ay, and moreover, he is at rest from all persecutions,
and troubles, and afflictions, of which, Got knows, and I know, he had his own
share. -- Ochree! Ochree! he was a promising youth indeed!" -- So saying, he
groaned grievously, and began to whine in such a manner, as persuaded me he had
a real friendship for me. -- The sergeant, alarmed at his words, came into the
birth, and while he looked upon me, I smiled, and tipped him the wink; he
immediately guessed my meaning, and remained silent, which confirmed Morgan in
his opinion of my being dead; whereupon he approached with tears in his eyes,
in order to indulge his grief with a sight of the object: And I counterfeited
death so well, by fixing my eyes, and droping my under-jaw, that he said,
"There he lies, no petter than a lump of clay, Got help me." And observed by
the distortion of my face, that I must have had a strong struggle. I should not
have been able to contain myself much longer, when he began to perform the last
duty of a friend, in closing my eyes and my mouth; upon which, I suddenly
snapped at his fingers, and discomposed him so much, that he started back,
turned pale as ashes, and stared like the picture of horror! Although I could
not help laughing at his appearance, I was concerned for his situation, and
stretched out my hand, telling him, I hoped to live and eat some salmagundy of
his making in England. -- It was some time before he could recollect himself so
far as to feel my pulse, and enquire into the particulars of my disease: But
when he found I had enjoyed a favorable crisis, he congratulated me upon my
good fortune; not failing to ascribe it, under Got, to the blister he had
applied to my back, at his last visit; which, by the bye, said he, must now be
removed and dressed: He was actually going to fetch dressings, when I feigning
astonishment, said, "Bless me! sure you never applied a blister to me -- there
is nothing on my back, I assure you." -- Of this he could not be convinced till
he had examined, and then endeavored to conceal his confusion, by expressing
his surprise in finding the skin untouched, and the plaster missing. -- In
order to excuse myself for paying so little regard to his prescription, I
pretended to have been insensible when it was put on, and to have pulled it off
afterward, in a fit of delirium. This apology satisfied my friend, who on this
occasion abated a good deal of his stiffness in regard to punctilios; and as we
were now safely arrived at Jamaica, where I had the benefit of fresh provision,
and other refreshments, I recovered strength every day, and in a short time, my
health and vigor were perfectly re-established. -- When I got up at first, and
was just able to crawl about the deck, with a staff in my hand, I met doctor
Mackshane, who passed by me with a disdainful look, and did not vouchsafe to
honor me with one word: After him came Crampley, who strutting up to me, with
a fierce countenance, pronounced, "Here Is fine discipline on board, when such
lazy sculking sons of b -- ches as you, are allowed, on pretense of sickness,
to lollop at your ease, while your betters are kept to hard duty!" -- The sight
and behavior of this malicious scoundrel, enraged me so much, that I could
scarce refrain from laying my cudgel across his pate; but when I considered my
present feebleness, and the enemies I had in the ship, who wanted only a
pretense to ruin me, I restrained my passion, and contented myself with telling
him, I had not forgot his insolence and malice, and that I hoped we should meet
one day on shore. -- At this he grinned, shook his fist at me, and swore he
longed for nothing more than such an opportunity.

Mean while, our ship was ordered to be heaved down, victualled and watered,
for her return to England; and our captain, for some reason or other, not
thinking it convenient for him to revisit his native country at this time,
exchanged with a gentleman, who on the other hand, wished for nothing so much,
as to be safe without the tropic; all his care and tenderness of himself,
being insufficient to preserve his complexion from the injuries of the sun and
weather.

Our tyrant having left the ship, and carried his favorite Mackshane along
with him, to my inexpressible satisfaction; our new commander came on board, in
a ten-oar'd barge, overshadowed with a vast umbrella, and appeared in every
thing quite the reverse of Oakhum, being a tall, thin, young man, dressed in
this manner; a white hat garnished with a red feather, adorned his head, from
whence his hair flowed down upon his shoulders, in ringlets tied behind with a
ribbon. -- His coat, consisting of pink-coloured silk, lined with white, by the
elegance of the cut retired backward, as it were, to discover a white satin
waistcoat embroidered with gold, unbuttoned at the upper part, to display a
broch set with garnets, that glittered in the breast of his shirt, which was of
the finest cambrick, edged with right mechlin: The knees of his crimson velvet
breeches scarce descended so low as to meet his silk stockings, which rose
without spot or wrinkle on his meagre legs, from shoes of blue Meroquin,
studded with diamond buckles, that flamed forth rivals to the sun! A
steel-hilted sword, inlaid with figures of gold, and decked with a knot of
ribbon which fell down in a rich tossle, equipped his side; and an amber-headed
cane hung dangling from his wrist: -- But the most remarkable parts or his
furniture were, a mask on his face, and white gloves on his hands, which did
not seem to be put on with an intention to be pulled off occasionally, but were
fixed with a ring set with a ruby on the little finger of one hand, and by one
set with a topaz on that of the other. -- In this garb, captain Whiffle, for
that was his name, took possession of the ship, surrounded with a crowd of
attendants, all of whom, in their different degrees, seemed to be of their
patron's disposition; and the air was so impregnated with perfumes, that one
may venture to affirm the clime of Arabia Foelix was not half so sweet scented.
-- My fellow-mate, observing no surgeon among his train, thought he had found
an occasion too favorable for himself to be neglected; and remembering the old
proverb, "Spare to speak, and spare to speed," resolved to solicit the new
captain's interest immediately, before any other surgeon could be appointed for
the ship. -- With this view he repaired to the cabin, in his ordinary dress,
consisting of a check-shirt and trousers, a brown linen waistcoat, and a
nightcap of the same, neither very clean, which for his further misfortune,
happened to smell strong of tobacco. -- Entering without any ceremony, into
this sacred place, he found captain Whiffle reposing upon a couch, with a
wrapper of fine chintz about his body, and a muslin cape bordered with lace
upon his head; and after several low conge's, began in this manner: -- "Sir, I
hope you will forgive, and excuse, and pardon the presumption of one who has
not the honor of being known unto you, but who is, nevertheless, a shentleman
porn and pred, and moreover has had misfortunes, Got help me, in the world." --
Here he was interrupted by the captain, who at first sight of him had started
up with great amazement at the novelty of the apparition; and having
recollected himself, pronounced, with a look and tone signifying disdain,
curiosity and surprise, "Zauns! who art thou?" -- "I am surgeon's first first
mate on board of this ship (replied Morgan) and I most vehemently desire and
beseech you with all submission, to be pleased to condescend and vouchsafe to
enquire into my character, and my pehaviour, and my deserts, which, under Got,
I hope, will entitle me to the vacancy of surgeon." -- As he proceeded in his
speech, he continued advancing toward the captain, whose nostrils were no
sooner saluted with the aromatic flavor that exhaled from him; than he cried
with great emotion, "Heaven preserve me! I am suffocated! -- Fellow, Fellow,
away with thee! -- Curse thee, fellow! get thee gone, -- I shall be stunk to
death!" -- At the noise of his outcries, his servants run into his apartment,
and he accosted them thus; "Villains! cutthroats! traitors! I am betrayed! I
am sacrificed! -- Will you not carry that monster away? or must I be stifled
with the stench of him? oh! oh!" -- With these interjections, he sunk down upon
his settee in a fit; his valet de chamber plied him with a smelling-bottle, one
footman chased his temples with Hungary water, another sprinkled the floor with
spirits of lavender, and a third pushed Morgan out of the cabin; who coming to
the place where I was, sat down with a demure countenance, and, according to
his custom, when he received any indignity which he durst not revenge, began to
sing a Welsh ditty. -- I guessed he was under some agitation of spirits, and
desired to know the cause; but instead of answering me directly, he asked with
great emotion, if I thought him a monster and a stinkard? "A monster and a
stinkard (said I, with some surprise) did any body call you so?" -- "Got is my
judge (replied he) captain Fifle did call me both; ay, and all the water in the
Tawy will not wash it out of my remembrance. -- I do affirm, and avouch, and
maintain, with my soul, and my pody, and my plood, look you, that I have no
smells about me, but such as a christian ought to have, except the effluvia of
topacco, which is a cephalic, odoriferous, aromatic herb, and he is a son of a
mountain-goat who says otherwise. -- As for my being a monster, let that be as
it is; I am as Got was pleased to create me, which, peradventure, is more than
I shall aver of him who gave me that title; for I will proclaim it before the
world, that he is disguised, and transfigured, and transmographied with
affectation and whimsies; and that he is more like a papoon than one of the
human race."

CHAP. XXXV.
Captain Whiffle sends for me -- his situation described -- his surgeon
arrives, prescribes for him, and puts him to bed -- a bed is put up for Mr.
Simper contiguous to the stateroom, which, with other parts of the captain's
behavior, gives the ship's company a very unfavourable idea of their commander
-- I am detained in the West Indies, by the admiral, and go on board of the
Lizard sloop of war, in quality of surgeon's mate, where I make myself known to
the Surgeon, who treats me very kindly -- I go on shore, sell my ticket,
purchase necessaries, and at my return on board, am surprised at the sight of
Crampley, who is appointed lieutenant of the sloop -- we sail on a cruize --
take a prize, in which I arrive at Port Morant, under the command of my mess
mate, with whom I live in great harmony.

HE was going on, with an elogium upon the captain, when I received a message
to clean myself, and go up to the great cabin, which I immediately performed,
sweetening myself with rose water from the medicine-chest. When I entered the
room, I was ordered to stand by the door, until captain Whiffle had
reconnoitred me at a distance, with a spy-glass, who having consulted one sense
in this manner, bid me advance gradually, that his nose might have
intelligence, before it could be much offended: I therefore approached with
great caution and success, and he was pleased to say, "Ay, this creature is
tolerable." -- I found him lolling on his couch with a languishing air, his
head supported by his valet de chamber, who from time to time applied a
smelling-bottle to his nose. -- "Vergette, (said he, in a squeaking tone) do
thou think this wretch (meaning me) will do me no injury? may I venture to
submit my arm to him?" -- "Pon my vord, (replied the valet) I do tink dat dear
be great occasion for your honor losing one small quantite of blodt; and the
young mun ave qulque chose of de bonne mine. -- "Well then (said his master) I
think I must venture." -- Then addressing himself to me, "Have thou ever
blooded any body but brutes? -- But I need not ask thee, for thou will tell me
a most damnable lie." -- "Brutes, Sir, (answered I, pulling down his glove in
order to feel his pulse) I never meddle with brutes." -- "What the devil art
thou about? (cried he) do thou intend to twist off my hand? Gad's curse! my
arm is benumbed up to the very shoulder! Heaven have mercy upon me! must I
perish under the hands of savages? What an unfortunate dog was I to come on
board without my own surgeon, Mr. Simper." -- I craved pardon for having
handled him so roughly, and with the utmost care and tenderness tied up his arm
with a fillet of silk. While I was seeling for the vein, he desired to know how
much blood I intended to take from him, and when I answered, "Not above twelve
ounces;" started up with a look full of horror, and bid me begone, swearing I
had a design upon his life. -- Vergette appeased him with some difficulty, and
opening a bureau, took out a pair of scales, in one of which was placed a small
cup; and putting them into my hand, told me, the captain never lost above an
ounce and three drachms at one time. -- While I prepared for this important
evacuation, there came into the cabin, a young man, gayly dressed, of a very
delicate complexion, with a kind of languid smile on his face, which seemed to
have been rendered habitual, by a long course of affectation. -- The captain no
sooner perceived him, than rising hastily, he flew into his arms, crying, "O!
my dear Simper! I am excessively disordered! I have been betrayed, frighted,
murdered by the negligence of my servants, who suffered a beast, a mule, a bear
to surprise me, and stink me into convulsions with the fumes of tobacco." --
Simper, who by this time, I found, was obliged to art for the clearness of his
complexion, assumed an air of softness and sympathy, and lamented with many
tender expressions of sorrow, the sad accident that had thrown him into that
condition; then feeling his patient's pulse on the outside of his glove, gave
it as his opinion, that his disorder was entirely nervous, and that some drops
of tincture of castor and liquid laudanum, would be of more service to him than
bleeding, by bridling the inordinate sallies of his spirits, and composing the
fermentation of his bile proceeding therefrom. -- I was therefore sent to
prepare this prescription, which was administered in a glass of sack-posset,
after the captain had been put to bed, and orders sent to the officers on the
quarter deck, to let no body walk on that side under which he lay.

While the captain enjoyed his repose, the doctor watched over him, and indeed
became so necessary, that a cabin was made for him contiguous to the
state-room, where Whiffle slept; that he might be at hand in case of accidents
in the night. -- Next day, our commander being happily recovered, gave orders,
that none of the lieutenants should appear upon deck, without a wig, sword, and
ruffles; nor any midshipman, or other petty officer, be seen with a check shirt
or dirty linen. -- He also prohibited any person whatever, except Simper and
his own servants, from coming into the great cabin, without first sending in
to obtain leave. -- These singular regulations did not prepossess the ship's
company in his favor; but on the contrary, gave scandal an opportunity to be
very busy with his character, and accuse him of maintaining a correspondence
with his surgeon, not fit to be named.

In a few weeks, our ship was under sailing orders, and I was in hopes of
re-visiting my native country in a very short time, when the admiral's surgeon
came on board, and sending for Morgan and me to the quarter deck, gave me to
understand, there was a great scarcity of surgeons in the West Indies, that he
was commanded to detain one mate out of every great ship that was bound for
England; and desired us to agree among ourselves, before the next day at that
hour, which of us should stay behind. -- We were thunderstruck at this
proposal, and stared at one another some time, without speaking; at length the
Welchman broke silence, and offered to remain in the West Indies, provided the
admiral would give him a surgeon's warrant immediately: But he was told there
was no want of chief surgeons, and that he must be contented with the station
of mate, till he should be further provided for in due course: Whereupon Morgan
flatly refused to quit the ship for which the commissioners of the navy had
appointed him; and the other told him as plainly, that if we could not
determine the affair by ourselves before tomorrow morning, he must cast lots,
and abide by his chance. -- When I recalled to my remembrance the miseries I
had undergone in England, where I had not one friend to promote my interest, or
favor my advancement in the navy, and at the same time, reflected on the
present dearth of surgeons in the West Indies, and the unhealthiness of the
climate, which every day, almost, reduced the number, I could not help thinking
my success would be much more certain and expeditious, by staying where I was,
than by returning to Europe. -- I therefore resolved to comply with a good
grace, and next day, when we were ordered to throw dice, told Morgan, he needed
not trouble himself, for I would voluntarily submit to the admiral's pleasure.
-- This frank declaration was commended by the gentleman, who assured me, it
should not fare the worse with me for my resignation: Indeed he was as good as
his word, and that very afternoon, procured a warrant, appointing me surgeon's
mate of the Lizzard sloop of war, which put me on a footing with every first
mate in the service.

My ticket being made out, I put my chest and bedding on board a canoe that was
alongside, and having shook hands with my trusty friend the sergeant, and
honest Jack Rattlin, who was bound for Greenwich-hospital, I took my leave of
Morgan with many tears, after we had exchanged our sleeve-buttons as
remembrances of each other. -- Having presented my new warrant to the captain
of the Lizard, I enquired for the doctor, whom I no sooner saw, than I
recollected him to be one of those young fellows with whom I had been committed
to the round-house, during our frolic with Jackson, as I have related before.
-- He received me with a good deal of courtesy, and when I put him in mind of
our former acquaintance, expressed great joy in seeing me again, and
recommended me to an exceeding good mess, composed of the gunner and the
master's mate. -- As there was not one sick person in the ship, I got leave to
go ashore, next day, with the gunner, who recommended me to a Jew, that bought
my ticket, at the rate of 40 per cent. discount; and having furnished myself
with what necessaries I wanted, returned on board in the evening, and to my
great surprise, found my old antagonist Crampley walking upon deck. -- Though I
did not fear his enmity, I was shocked at his appearance, and communicated my
sentiments on that subject to Mr. Tomlins the surgeon, who told me, that
Crampley, by the dint of some friends about the admiral, had procured a
commission constituting him lieutenant on board the Lizzard: and advised me,
now he was my superior officer, to behave with some respect toward him, or
else he would find a thousand opportunities of using me ill. -- This advice was
a bitter potion to me, whom pride and resentment had rendered utterly incapable
of the least submission to, or even of reconciliation with the wretch, who had,
on many occasions, treated me so inhumanly: However, I resolved to have as
little connection as possible with him, and to ingratiate myself as much as I
could with the rest of the officers, whose friendship might be a bulwark to
defend me from the attempts of his malice.

In less than a week we sailed on a cruize, and having got round the east end
of the island, had the good fortune to take a Spanish Barcolongo, with her
prize, which was an English ship bound for Bristol, that sailed from Jamaica a
fortnight before, without convoy. All the prisoners who were well, were put on
shore on the north-side of the island; the prizes were manned with Englishmen,
and the command of the Barcolongo, given to my friend the master's mate, with
orders to carry them into Port Morant, and there to remain until the Lizzard's
cruize should be ended, at which time she would touch at the same place in her
way to Port Royal. -- With him I was sent to attend the wounded Spaniards as
well as Englishmen, who amounted to sixteen, and to take care of them on shore,
in a house that was to be hired as an hospital. -- This destination gave me a
great deal of pleasure, as I would, for some time, be freed from the arrogance
of Crampley, whose inveteracy against me had already broke out on two or three
occasions, since he was become a lieutenant. -- My mess-mate, who very much
resembled my uncle, both in figure and disposition, treated me on board of the
prize, with the utmost civility and confidence; and among other favors, made
me a present of a silver hilted hanger, and a pair of pistols mounted with the
same metal, which fell to his share in plundering the enemy. -- We arrived
safely at Morant, and going ashore, pitched upon an empty storehouse, which we
hired for the reception of the wounded, who were brought to it next day, with
beds and other necessaries; and four of the ship's company appointed to attend
them, and obey me.

CHAP. XXXVI.
A strange adventure -- in consequence of which I am extremely happy --
Crampley does me ill offices with the captain: But his malice is defeated by
the goodnature and friendship of the surgeon -- we return to Port Royal -- our
captain gets the command of a larger ship, and is succeeded by an old man --
Brayl is provided for -- we receive orders to sail for England.

WHEN my patients were all in a fair way, my companion and commander, whose
name was Brayl, carried me up the country to the house of a rich planter, with
whom he was acquainted; where we were sumptuously entertained, and in the
evening set out on our return to the ship. When we had walked about a mile by
moonlight, we perceived a horseman behind us, who coming up, wished us good
even, and asked which way we went: His voice, which was quite familiar to me,
no sooner struck my ear, than, in spite of all my resolution and reflection, my
hair bristled up, and I was seized with a violent fit of trembling, which Brayl
mis-interpreting, bid me be under no concern, for he would stand by me. -- I
told him, he was mistaken in the cause of my disorder; and addressing myself to
the person on horseback, said, "I could have sworn by your voice, that you was
a dear friend of mine, if I had not been certain of his death." -- To this,
after some pause, he replied, "There are many voices as well as faces that
resemble one another; but pray, what was your friend's name?" I satisfied him
in that particular, and gave a short detail of the melancholy fate of Thomson,
not without many sighs and some tears. A silence ensued which lasted some
minutes, and then the conversation turned on indifferent subjects, till we
arrived at a house on the road, where the horseman alighted, and begged with so
much earnestness, that we would go in and drink a bowl of punch with him, that
we could not resist. -- But if I was alarmed at his voice, what must my
amazement be, when I discovered by the light, the very person of my lamented
friend! Perceiving my confusion, which was extreme, he clasped me in his arms
and bedewed my face with tears. -- It was some time ere I recovered the use of
my reason, overpowered with this event, and longer still before I could speak.
So that all I was capable of, was to return his embraces, and to mingle the
overflowings of my joy with his; while honest Brayl, affected with the scene,
wept as fast as either of us, and signified his participation of our happiness,
by hugging us both, and capering about the room like a madman. -- At length I
retrieved the use of my tongue, and cried, "Is it possible, can you be my
friend Thomson? No certainly, alas! he was drowned! and I am now under the
deception of a dream!" -- Then I relapsed into tears. -- He was at great pains
to convince me of his being the individual person whom I regretted, and bidding
me sit down and compose myself, promised to explain his sudden disappearance
from the Thunder, and to account for his being at present in the land of the
living. -- This he acquitted himself of, after I had drank a glass of punch,
and recollected myself; by informing us, that with a determination to rid
himself of a miserable existence, he had gone in the nighttime to the head,
while the ship was on her way, from whence he slipped down, as softly as he
could by the bows, into the sea, where, after he was heartily ducked, he began
to repent of his precipitation, and as he could swim very well, kept himself
above water, in hopes of being taken up by some of the ships astern; -- that in
this situation, he hailed a large vessel and begged to be taken in, but was
answered, that she was a heavy sailor, and therefore they did not choose to lose
time, by bringing to; however, they threw an old chest overboard, for his
convenience, and told him, that some of the ships a-stern would certainly save
him; -- that no other vessel came within sight or cry of him, for the space of
three hours, during which time he had the mortification of finding himself in
the middle of the ocean alone, without support or resting place, but what a few
crazy boards afforded; till at last, he discerned a small sloop steering
toward him, upon which he set up his throat, and had the good fortune to be
heard and rescued from the dreary waste, by their boat, which was hoisted out
on purpose. -- "I was no sooner brought on board (continued he) than I fainted;
and when I recovered my senses, found myself in bed, regaled with a most
noisome smell of onions and cheese, which made me think at first, that I was in
my own hammock, along-side of honest Morgan, and that all which had passed was
no more than a dream. -- Upon enquiry I understood that I was on board of a
schooner belonging to Rhode Island, bound for Jamaica, with a cargo of geese,
pigs, onions, and cheese; and that the master's name was Robertson, by birth a
North Briton, whom I knew at first sight to be an old school-fellow of mine. --
When I discovered myself to him, he was transported with surprise and joy, and
begged to know the occasion of my misfortune, which I did not think fit to
disclose, because I knew his notions with regard to religion, were very severe
and confined; therefore contented myself with telling him, I fell overboard by
accident; but made no scruple of explaining the nature of my disagreeable
station, and of acquainting him with my determined purpose never to return to
the Thunder man of war." -- "Although he was not of my opinion in that
particular, knowing that I must lose my clothes, and what pay was due to me,
unless I went back to my duty; yet, when I described the circumstances of the
hellish life I led, under the tyrannic sway of Oakhum and Mackshane; and among
other grievances, hinted a dissatisfaction at the irreligious deportment of my
ship-mates, and the want of the true Presbyterian gospel doctrine; he changed
his sentiments, and conjured me with great vehemence and zeal to lay aside all
thoughts of rising in the navy; and that he might show how much he had my
interest at heart, undertook to provide for me in some shape or other, before
he should leave Jamaica. -- This he performed to my heart's desire, by
recommending me to a gentleman of fortune, with whom I have lived ever since,
in quality of surgeon and overseer to his plantations. -- He and his lady are
now at Kingston, so that I am, for the present, master of this house, to which,
from my soul, I bid you welcome, and hope you will favor me with your company
during the remaining part of the night." -- I needed not a second invitation;
but Mr. Brayl, who was a diligent and excellent officer, could not be persuaded
to sleep out of the ship: However, he supped with us, and after having drank a
cheerful glass, set out for the vessel, which was not above three miles from
the place, escorted by a couple of stout Negroes, whom Mr. Thomson ordered to
conduct him. -- Never were two friends more happy in the conversation of one
another than we, for the time it lasted: I related to him the particulars of
our attempt upon Carthagena, of which he had heard but an imperfect account;
and he gratified me with a narration of every little incident of his life since
we parted. -- He assured me, it was with the utmost reluctance, he could resist
his inclination of coming down to Port Royal to see Morgan and me, of whom he
had heard no tidings since the day of our separation; but that he was
restrained by the fear of being detained as a deserter. -- He told me, that
when he heard my voice in the dark, he was almost as much surprised as I was at
seeing him afterward; and in the confidence of friendship, disclosed a passion
he entertained for the only daughter of the gentleman with whom he lived, who,
by his description, was a very amiable young lady, and did not distain his
addresses; that he was very much favored by her parents, and did not despair
of obtaining their consent to the match, which would at once render him
independent of the world. -- I congratulated him on his good fortune, which he
protested should never make him forget his friend; and toward morning we
betook ourselves to rest.

Next day he accompanied me to the ship, where Mr. Brayl entertained him at
dinner, and having spent the afternoon together, he took his leave of us in the
evening, after he had forced upon me ten pistoles, as a small token of his
affection. -- In short, while we staid here, we saw one another every day, and
generally eat at the same table, which was plentifully supplied by him, with
all kinds of poultry, butcher's meat, oranges, limes, lemons, pine-aples,
Madeira-wine, and excellent rum; so that this small interval of ten days, was
by far the most agreeable period of my life.

At length, the Lizzard arrived; and as my patients were all fit for duty, they
and I were ordered on board of her, where I understood from Mr. Tomlins, that
there was a dryness between the lieutenant and him, on my account; that
rancorous villain having taken the opportunity of my absence, to fill the
captain's ears with a thousand scandalous stories, to my prejudice; among other
things affirming, that I had been once transported for theft, and that when I
was in the Thunder man of war I had been whipped for the same crime. -- The
surgeon, on the other hand, having heard my whole story from my own mouth,
defended me strenuously, and in the course of that good-natured office,
recounted all the instances of Crampley's malice against me, while I remained
on board of that ship. -- Which declaration, while it satisfied the captain of
my innocence, made the lieutenant as much my defender's enemy as mine. This
infernal behavior of Crampley, with regard to me, added such fuel to my former
resentment, that at certain times, I was quite beside myself with the desire of
revenge, and was even tempted to pistol him on the quarter deck, though an
infamous death must inevitably have been my reward. -- But the surgeon, who was
my confident, argued against such a desperate action so effectually, that I
stifled the flame which consumed me for the present, and resolved to wait a
more convenient opportunity. -- In the mean time, that Mr. Tomlins might be the
more convinced of the wrongs I suffered by this fellow's slander, I begged he
would go and visit Mr. Thomson, whose wonderful escape I had made him
acquainted with, and enquire of him into the particulars of my conduct, while
he was my fellow-mate. This the surgeon complied with, more through curiosity
to see a person whose fate had been so extraordinary, than to confirm his good
opinion of me, which, he assured me, was already firmly established. -- He
therefore set out for the dwellingplace of my friend, with a letter of
introduction from me; and being received with all the civility and kindness I
expected, returned to the ship, not only satisfied with my character, beyond
the power of doubt or insinuation, but also charmed with the affability and
conversation of Thomson, who loaded him and me with presents of fresh stock,
liquors and fruit. As he would not venture to come and see us on board, left
Crampley should know and detain him, when the time of our departure approached,
I obtained leave to go and bid him farewell. -- After we had vowed an
everlasting friendship, he pressed upon me a purse with four double dubloons,
which I refused as long as I could, without giving umbrage; and having
cordially embraced each other, I returned on board, where I found a small box,
with a letter directed for me, to the care of Mr. Tomlins. -- Knowing the
superscription to be of Thomson's handwriting, I opened it with some surprise,
and learned that this generous friend, not contented with loading me with the
presents already mentioned, had sent for my use and acceptance, half a dozen
fine shirts, and as many linen waistcoats and caps, with twelve pair of new
thread-stockings. -- Being thus provided with money, and all necessaries for
the comfort of life, I began to look upon myself as a gentleman of some
consequence, and felt my pride dilate apace.

Next day we sailed for Port Royal, where we arrived safely with our prizes;
and as there was nothing to do on board, I went ashore, and having purchased a
laced waistcoat, with some other clothes at a vendue, made a swaggering figure
for some days, among the taverns, where I ventured to play a little at hazard,
and came off with fifty pistoles in my pocket. Mean while our captain was
promoted to a ship of twenty guns, and the command of the Lizzard given to a
man turned of fourscore, who had been lieutenant since the reign of king
William to this time, and notwithstanding his long service, would have probably
died in that station, had he not employed some prize-money he had lately
received, to make interest with his superiors. My friend Brayl was also made an
officer about the same time, after he had served in quality of midshipman and
mate five and twenty years. Soon after these alterations, the admiral pitched
upon our ship to carry home dispatches for the ministry; accordingly we set
sail for England, having first scrubbed her bottom, and taken in provision and
water for the occasion.

The END of the FIRST VOLUME.
