
A Family Scene

Repose is not more welcome to the worn and to the aged, to the sick and to the 
unhappy, than danger, difficulty, and toil to the young and adventurous. Danger 
they encounter but as the forerunner of success; difficulty, as the spur of 
ingenuity; and toil, as the herald of honour. The experience which teaches the 
lesson of truth, and the blessings of tranquillity, comes not in the shape of 
warning nor of wisdom; from such they turn aside, defying or disbelieving. 'Tis 
in the bitterness of personal proof alone, in suffering and in feeling, in 
erring and in repenting, that experience comes home with conviction, or 
impresses to any use.

In the bosom of her respectable family resided Camilla. Nature, with a bounty 
the most profuse, had been lavish to her of attractions; Fortune, with a 
moderation yet kinder, had placed her between luxury and indigence. Her abode 
was in the parsonage-house of Etherington, beautifully situated in the unequal 
county of Hampshire, and in the vicinity of the varied landscapes of the New 
Forest. Her father, the rector, was the younger son of the house of Tyrold. The 
living, though not considerable, enabled its incumbent to attain every rational 
object of his modest and circumscribed wishes; to bestow upon a deserving wife 
whatever her own forbearance declined not; and to educate a lovely race of one 
son and three daughters, with that expansive propriety, which unites 
improvement for the future with present enjoyment.

In goodness of heart, and in principles of piety, this exemplary couple was 
bound to each other by the most perfect unison of character, though in their 
tempers there was a contrast which had scarce the gradation of a single shade 
to smooth off its abrupt dissimilitude. Mr. Tyrold, gentle with wisdom, and 
benign in virtue, saw with compassion all imperfections but his own, and there 
doubled the severity which to others he spared. Yet the mildness that urged him 
to pity blinded him not to approve; his equity was unerring, though his 
judgment was indulgent. His partner had a firmness of mind which nothing could 
shake: calamity found her resolute; even prosperity was powerless to lull her 
duties asleep. The exalted character of her husband was the pride of her 
existence, and the source of her happiness. He was not merely her standard of 
excellence, but of endurance, since her sense of his worth was the criterion 
for her opinion of all others. This instigated a spirit of comparison, which is 
almost always uncandid, and which here could rarely escape proving injurious. 
Such, at its very best, is the unskilfulness of our fallible nature, that even 
the noble principle which impels our love of right, misleads us but into new 
deviations, when its ambition presumes to point at perfection. In this 
instance, however, distinctness of disposition stifled not reciprocity of 
affection—that magnetic concentration of all marriage felicity;—Mr. Tyrold 
revered while he softened the rigid virtues of his wife, who adored while she 
fortified the melting humanity of her husband.

Thus, in an interchange of happiness the most deserved, and of parental 
occupations the most promising, passed the first married years of this blest 
and blessing pair. An event then came to pass extremely interesting at the 
moment, and yet more important in its consequences. This was the receipt of a 
letter from the elder brother of Mr. Tyrold, containing information that he 
meant to remove into Hampshire.

Sir Hugh Tyrold was a baronet, who resided upon the hereditary estate of the 
family in Yorkshire. He was many years older than Mr. Tyrold, who had never 
seen him since his marriage; religious duties, prudence, and domestic affairs 
having from that period detained him at his benefice; while a passion for field 
sports had, with equal constancy, kept his brother stationary.

The baronet began his letter with kind enquiries after the welfare of Mr. 
Tyrold and his family, and then entered upon the state of his own affairs, 
briefly narrating, that he had lost his health, and, not knowing what to do 
with himself, had resolved to change his habitation, and settle near his 
relations. The Cleves' estate, which he heard was just by Etherington, being 
then upon sale, he desired his brother to make the purchase for him out of 
hand; and then to prepare Mrs. Tyrold, with whom he was yet unacquainted, 
though he took it for granted she was a woman of great learning, to receive a 
mere poor country squire, who knew no more of hic, hæc, hoc, than the baby 
unborn. He begged him to provide a proper apartment for their niece Indiana 
Lynmere, whom he should bring with him, and another for their nephew Clermont, 
who was to follow at the next holidays; and not to forget Mrs. Margland, 
Indiana's governess, she being rather the most particular in point of pleasing 
amongst them.

Mr. Tyrold, extremely gratified by this unexpected renewal of fraternal 
intercourse, wrote the warmest thanks to his brother, and executed the 
commission with the utmost alacrity. A noble mansion, with an extensive 
pleasure-ground, scarce four miles distant from the parsonage-house of 
Etherington, was bought, fitted up, and made ready for his reception in the 
course of a few months. The baronet, impatient to take possession of his new 
territory, arrived speedily after, with his niece Indiana, and was welcomed at 
the gate of the park by Mr. Tyrold and his whole family.

Sir Hugh Tyrold inherited from his ancestors an unincumbered estate of £.5000 
per annum; which he enjoyed with ease and affluence to himself, and 
disseminated with a good will so generous, that he appeared to think his 
personal prosperity, and that of all who surrounded him, bestowed but to be 
shared in common, rather from general right, than through his own dispensing 
bounty. His temper was unalterably sweet, and every thought of his breast was 
laid open to the world with an almost infantine artlessness. But his talents 
bore no proportion to the goodness of his heart, an insuperable want of 
quickness, and of application in his early days, having left him, at a later 
period, wholly uncultivated, and singularly self-formed.

A dearth of all sedentary resources became, when his youth passed away, his own 
constant reproach. Health failed him in the meridian of his life, from the 
consequences of a wound in his side, occasioned by a fall from his horse; 
exercise, therefore, and active diversions, were of necessity relinquished, and 
as these had hitherto occupied all his time, except that portion which he 
delighted to devote to hospitality and neighbourly offices, now equally beyond 
his strength, he found himself at once deprived of all employment, and 
destitute of all comfort. Nor did any plan occur to him to solace his 
misfortunes, till he accidentally read in the newspapers that the Cleves' 
estate was upon sale.

Indiana, the niece who accompanied him, a beautiful little girl, was the orphan 
daughter of a deceased sister, who, at the death of her parents, had, with 
Clermont, an only brother, been left to the guardianship of Sir Hugh; with the 
charge of a small estate for the son of scarce £.200 a-year, and the sum of 
£.1000 for the fortune of the daughter.

The meeting was a source of tender pleasure to Mr. Tyrold; and gave birth in 
his young family to that eager joy which is so naturally attached, by our 
happiest early prejudices, to the first sight of near relations. Mrs. Tyrold 
received Sir Hugh with the complacency due to the brother of her husband; who 
now rose higher than ever in her estimation, from a fraternal comparison to the 
unavoidable disadvantage of the baronet; though she was not insensible to the 
fair future prospects of her children, which seemed the probable result of his 
change of abode.

Sir Hugh himself, notwithstanding his best affections were all opened by the 
sight of so many claimants to their kindness, was the only dejected person of 
the group.

Though too good in his nature for envy, a severe self-upbraiding followed his 
view of the happiness of his brother; he regretted he had not married at the 
same age, that he might have owned as fine a family, and repined against the 
unfortunate privileges of his birth-right, which, by indulging him in his first 
youth with whatever he could covet, drove from his attention that modest 
foresight, which prepares for later years the consolation they are sure to 
require.

By degrees, however, the satisfaction spread around him found some place in his 
own breast, and he acknowledged himself sensibly revived by so endearing a 
reception; though he candidly avowed, that if he had not been at a loss what to 
do, he should never have had a thought of taking so long a journey. 'But the 
not having made,' cried he, 'the proper proficiency in my youth for the filling 
up my time, has put me quite behind-hand.'

He caressed all the children with great fondness, and was much struck with the 
beauty of his three nieces, particularly with that of Camilla, Mr. Tyrold's 
second daughter; 'yet she is not,' he cried, 'so pretty as her little sister 
Eugenia, nor much better than t'other sister Lavinia; and not one of the three 
is half so great a beauty as my little Indiana; so I can't well make out what 
it is that's so catching in her; but there's something in her little mouth that 
quite wins me; though she looks as if she was half laughing at me too: which 
can't very well be, neither; for I suppose, as yet, at least, she knows no more 
of books and studying than her uncle. And that's little enough, God knows, for 
I never took to them in proper season; which I have been sorry enough for, upon 
coming to discretion.'

Then addressing himself to the boy, he exhorted him to work hard while yet in 
his youth, and related sundry anecdotes of the industry and merit of his father 
when at the same age, though left quite to himself, as, to his great 
misfortune, he had been also, 'which brought about,' he continued, 'my being 
this present ignoramus that you see me; which would not have happened, if my 
good forefathers had been pleased to keep a sharper look out upon my education.'

Lionel, the little boy, casting a comic glance at Camilla, begged to know what 
his uncle meant by a sharper look out?

'Mean, my dear? why correction, to be sure; for all that, they tell me, is to 
be done by the rod; so there, at least, I might have stood as good a chance as 
my neighbours.'

'And pray, uncle,' cried Lionel, pursing up his mouth to hide his laughter, 
'did you always like the thoughts of it so well?'

'Why no, my dear, I can't pretend to that; at your age I had no more taste for 
it than you have: but there's a proper season for every thing. However, though 
I tell you this for a warning, perhaps you may do without it; for, by what I 
hear, the rising generation's got to a much greater pitch since my time.'

He then added, he must advise him, as a friend, to be upon his guard, as his 
Cousin, Clermont Lynmere, who was coming home from Eton school next Christmas 
for the holidays, would turn out the very mirror of scholarship; for he had 
given directions to have him study both night and day, except what might be 
taken off for eating and sleeping: 'Because,' he continued, 'having proved the 
bad of knowing nothing in my own case, I have the more right to intermeddle 
with others. And he will thank me enough when once he has got over his 
classics. And I hope, my dear little boy, you see it in the same light too; 
which, however, is what I can't expect.'

The house was now examined; the fair little Indiana took possession of her 
apartment; Miss Margland was satisfied with the attention that had been paid 
her; and Sir Hugh was rejoiced to find a room for Clermont that had no window 
but a skylight, by which means his studies, he observed, would receive no 
interruption from gaping and staring about him. And, when the night advanced, 
Mr. Tyrold had the happiness of leaving him with some prospect of recovering 
his spirits.

The revival, however, lasted but during the novelty of the scene; depression 
returned with the feelings of ill health; and the happier lot of his brother, 
though born to almost nothing, filled him with incessent repentance of his own 
mismanagement.

In some measure to atone for this, he resolved to collect himself a family in 
his own house; and the young Camilla, whose dawning archness of expression had 
instinctively caught him, he now demanded of her parents, to come and reside 
with him and Indiana at Cleves; 'for certainly,' he said, 'for such a young 
little thing, she looks full of amusement.'

Mrs. Tyrold objected against reposing a trust so precious where its value could 
so ill be appreciated. Camilla was, in secret, the fondest hope of her mother, 
though the rigour of her justice scarce permitted the partiality to beat even 
in her own breast. Nor did the happy little person need the avowed distinction. 
The tide of youthful glee flowed jocund from her heart, and the transparency of 
her fine blue veins almost shewed the velocity of its current. Every look was a 
smile, every step was a spring, every thought was a hope, every feeling was 
joy! and the early felicity of her mind was without allay. O blissful state of 
innocence, purity, and delight, why must it fleet so fast? why scarcely but by 
retrospection is its happiness known?

Mr. Tyrold, while his tenderest hopes encircled the same object, saw the 
proposal in a fairer light, from the love he bore to his brother. It seemed 
certain such a residence would secure her an ample fortune; the governess to 
whom Indiana was entrusted would take care of his little girl; though removed 
from the hourly instructions, she would still be within reach of the general 
superintendance of her mother, into whose power he cast the uncontrolled 
liberty to reclaim her, if there started any occasion. His children had no 
provision ascertained, should his life be too short to fulfil his own personal 
schemes of economy in their favour: and while to an argument so 
incontrovertible Mrs. Tyrold was silent, he begged her also to reflect, that, 
persuasive as were the attractions of elegance and refinement, no just parental 
expectations could be essentially disappointed, where the great moral lessons 
were practically inculcated, by a uniform view of goodness of heart, and 
firmness of principle. These his brother possessed in an eminent degree; and if 
his character had nothing more from which their daughter could derive benefit, 
it undoubtedly had not a point from which she could receive injury.

Mrs. Tyrold now yielded; she never resisted a remonstrance of her husband; and 
as her sense of duty impelled her also never to murmur, she retired to her own 
room, to conceal with how ill a grace she complied.

Had this lady been united to a man whom she despised, she would yet have obeyed 
him, and as scrupulously, though not as happily, as she obeyed her honoured 
partner. She considered the vow taken at the altar to her husband, as a 
voluntary vestal would have held one taken to her Maker; and no dissent in 
opinion exculpated, in her mind, the least deviation from his will.

But here, where an admiration almost adoring was fixt of the character to which 
she submitted, she was sure to applaud the motives which swayed him, however 
little their consequences met her sentiments: and even where the contrariety 
was wholly repugnant to her judgment, the genuine warmth of her just affection 
made every compliance, and every forbearance, not merely exempt from pain, but 
if to him any satisfaction, a sacrifice soothing to her heart.

Mr. Tyrold, whose whole soul was deeply affected by her excellencies, 
gratefully felt his power, and religiously studied not to abuse it: he 
respected what he owed to her conscience, he tenderly returned what he was 
indebted to her affection. To render her virtues conducive to her happiness, to 
soften her duties by the highest sense of their merit, were the first and most 
sacred objects of his solicitude in life.

When the lively and lovely little girl, mingling the tears of separation with 
all the childish rapture which novelty, to a much later period inspires, was 
preparing to change her home, 'Remember,' cried Mr. Tyrold, to her anxious 
mother, 'that on you, my Georgiana, devolves the sole charge, the unlimited 
judgment, to again bring her under this roof, the first moment she appears to 
you in any danger from having quitted it.'

The prompt and thankful acceptance of Mrs. Tyrold did justice to the sincerity 
of this offer: and the cheerful acquiescence of lessened reluctance, raised her 
higher in that esteem to which her constant mind invariably looked up, as the 
summit of her chosen ambition.
