
Lost Labour

From this period, the families of Etherington and Cleves lived in the enjoyment 
of uninterrupted harmony and repose, till Eugenia, the most juvenile of the 
set, had attained her fifteenth year.

Sir Hugh then wrote to Leipsic, desiring his nephew Lynmere to return home 
without delay. 'Not that I intend,' he said to Mr. Tyrold, 'marrying them 
together at this young age, Eugenia being but a child, except in point of 
Latin; though I assure you, my dear brother, she's the most sensible of the 
whole, poor Indiana being nothing to her, for all her prettiness; but the thing 
is, the sooner Clermont comes over, the sooner they may begin forming the 
proper regard.'

The knowledge of this projected alliance was by no means confined to Sir Hugh 
and Mr. and Mrs. Tyrold; it was known throughout the family, though never 
publicly announced, and understood from her childhood by Eugenia herself, 
though Mrs. Tyrold had exerted her utmost authority to prevent Sir Hugh from 
apprizing her of it in form. It was nevertheless, the joy of his heart to 
prepare the young people for each other: and his scheme received every 
encouragement he could desire, from the zeal and uncommon progress in her 
studies made by Eugenia; which most happily corresponded with all his 
injunctions to Leipsic, for the application and acquirements of Clermont.

Thus circumstanced, it was a blow to him the most unexpected, to receive from 
the young bridegroom elect, in answer to his summons home, a petition to make 
the tour of Europe, while yet on the continent.

'What!' cried Sir Hugh, 'and is this all his care for us? after so many years 
separation from his kin and kind, has he no natural longings to see his native 
land? no yearnings to know his own relations from strangers?'

Eugenia, notwithstanding her extreme youth, secretly applauded and admired a 
search of knowledge she would gladly have participated [in]; though she was not 
incurious to see the youth she considered as her destined partner for life, and 
to whom all her literary labours had been directed: for the never-failing 
method of Sir Hugh to stimulate her if she was idle, had been to assure her 
that, unless she worked harder, her cousin Clermont would eclipse her.

She had now acquired a decided taste for study, which, however unusual for her 
age, most fortunately rescued from weariness or sadness the sedentary life, 
which a weak state of health compelled her to lead. This induced her to look 
with pleasure upon Clermont as the object of her emulation, and to prosecute 
every plan for her improvement, with that vigour which accompanies a pursuit of 
our own choice; the only labour that asks no relaxation.

Steady occupations, such as these, kept off all attention to her personal 
misfortunes, which Sir Hugh had strictly ordered should never be alluded to; 
first, he said, for fear they should vex her; and next, lest they should make 
her hate him, for being their cause. Those incidents, therefore, from never 
being named, glided imperceptibly from her thoughts; and she grew up as 
unconscious as she was innocent, that, though born with a beauty which 
surpassed that of her lovely sisters, disease and accident had robbed her of 
that charm ere she knew she possessed it. But neither disease nor accident had 
power over her mind; there, in its purest proportions, moral beauty preserved 
its first energy. The equanimity of her temper made her seem, though a female, 
born to be a practical philosopher; her abilities and her sentiments were each 
of the highest class, uniting the best adorned intellects with the best 
principled virtues.

The dissatisfaction of Sir Hugh with his nephew reached not to prohibition: his 
consent was painful, but his remittances were generous, and Clermont had three 
years allowed him for his travels through Europe.

Yet this permission was no sooner granted than the baronet again became 
dejected. Three years appeared to him to be endless: he could hardly persuade 
himself to look forward to them with expectation of life; and all the learned 
labours he had promoted seemed vain and unpromising, ill requiting his toils, 
and still less answering his hopes. Even the studious turn of Eugenia, hitherto 
his first delight, he now thought served but to render her unsociable; and the 
time she devoted to study, he began to regret as lost to himself; nor could he 
suggest any possible consolation for his drooping spirits, till it occurred to 
him that Camilla might again enliven him.

This idea, and the order for his carriage, were the birth of the same moment; 
and, upon entering the study of Mr. Tyrold, he abruptly exclaimed, 'My dear 
brother, I must have Camilla back! Indiana says nothing to amuse me; and 
Eugenia is so bookish, I might as well live with an old woman; which God forbid 
I should object to, only I like Camilla better.'

This request was by no means welcome to Mr. Tyrold, and utterly distasteful to 
his lady. Camilla was now just seventeen years of age, and attractively lovely; 
but of a character that called for more attention to its developement than to 
its formation; though of a disposition so engaging, that affection kept pace 
with watchfulness, and her fond parents knew as little for their own sakes as 
for her's how to part with her.

Her qualities had a power which, without consciousness how, or consideration 
why, governed her whole family. The airy thoughtlessness of her nature was a 
source of perpetual amusement; and, if sometimes her vivacity raised a fear for 
her discretion, the innocence of her mind reassured them after every alarm. The 
interest which she excited served to render her the first object of the house; 
it was just short of solicitude, yet kept it constantly alive. Her spirits were 
volatile, but her heart was tender; her gaiety had a fascination; her 
persuasion was irresistible.

To give her now up to Sir Hugh, seemed to Mrs. Tyrold rather impossible than 
disagreeable; but he was too urgent with his brother to be wholly refused. She 
was granted him, therefore, as a guest, for the three ensuing months, to aid 
him to dissipate his immediate disappointment, from the procrastinated absence 
of Clermont.

Sir Hugh received back his first favourite with all the fond glee of a ductile 
imagination, which in every new good sees a refuge from every past or present 
evil. But, as the extremest distaste of all literature now succeeded those 
sanguine views which had lately made it his exclusive object, the first words 
he spoke upon her arrival were, to inform her she must learn no Latin; and the 
first step which followed her welcome, was a solemn charge to Dr. Orkborne, 
that he must give her no lessons.

The gaiety, the spirit, the playful good humour of Camilla, had lost nothing of 
their charm by added years, though her understanding had been sedulously 
cultivated, and her principles modelled by the pure and practical tenets of her 
exemplary parents. The delight of Sir Hugh in regaining her, consisted not 
merely of the renovation of his first prejudice in her favour; it was 
strengthened by the restoration it afforded his own mind to its natural state, 
and the relief of being disburthened of a task he was so ill calculated to 
undertake, as superintending, in any sort, intellectual pursuits.

BOOK II
