
Two Lovers

Indiana, intent but upon running on, had nearly reached the church-yard, 
without hearkening to one word of the expostulating Mandlebert; when, leaning 
over a tombstone, on which she had herself leant while waiting for the 
carriage, she perceived the young Oxonian. An instinctive spirit of coquetry 
made her now increase her pace; he heard the rustling of female approach, and 
looked up: her beauty, heightened by her flight, which animated her complexion, 
while it displayed her fine form, seemed more than ever celestial to the 
enamoured student; who darted forward from an impulse of irresistible surprise. 
'O Heaven!' she cried, panting and stopping as he met her; 'I shall die! I 
shall die!—I am pursued by a mad bull!'

Edgar would have explained, that all was safe; but Melmond neither heard nor 
saw him.—'O, give me, then,' he cried, emphatically; 'give me the ecstasy to 
protect—to save you!'

His out-spread arms shewed his intention to bear her away; but Edgar, placing 
himself between them, said: 'Pardon me, sir! this lady is under my care!'

'O don't fight about me! don't quarrel!' cried Indiana, with an apprehension 
half simple, half affected.

'No, Madam!' answered Melmond, respectfully retreating; 'I know too—too well! 
my little claim in such a dispute!—Permit me, however, to assist you, Mr. 
Mandlebert, in your search of refuge; and deign, madam, to endure me in your 
sight, till this alarm passes away.'

Indiana, by no means insensible to this language, looked with some elation at 
Edgar, to see how he bore it.

Edgar was not surprised; he had already observed the potent impression made by 
the beauty of Indiana upon the Oxonian; and was struck, in defiance of its 
romance and suddenness, with its air of sincerity; he only, therefore, gently 
answered, that there was not the least cause of fear.

'O, how can you say so?' said Indiana; 'how can you take so little interest in 
me?'

'At least, at least,' cried Melmond, trembling with eagerness, 'condescend to 
accept a double guard!—Refuse not, Mr. Mandlebert, to suffer any attendance!'

Mandlebert, a little embarrassed, answered: 'I have no authority to decide for 
Miss Lynmere: but, certainly, I see no occasion for my assistance.'

Melmond fervently clasped his hands, and exclaimed: 'Do not, do not, madam, 
command me to leave you till all danger is over!'

The little heart of Indiana beat high with triumph; she thought Mandlebert 
jealous: Miss Margland had often told her there was no surer way to quicken 
him: and, even independently of this idea, the spirit, the ardour, the 
admiration of the Oxonian, had a power upon her mind that needed no auxiliary 
for delighting it.

She curtsied her consent; but declared she would never go back the same way. 
They proceeded, therefore, by a little round to the high road, which led to the 
field in which the party had been dispersed.

Indiana was full of starts, little shrieks, and palpitations; every one of 
which rendered her, in the eyes of the Oxonian, more and more captivating; and, 
while Edgar walked gravely on, reflecting, with some uneasiness, upon being 
thus drawn in to suffer the attendance of a youth so nearly a stranger, upon a 
young lady actually under his protection; Melmond was continually ejaculating 
in return to her perpetual apprehensions, 'What lovely timidity!—What 
bewitching softness!—What feminine, what beautiful delicacy!—How sweet in 
terror!—How soul-piercing in alarm!'

These exclamations were nearly enchanting to Indiana, whose only fear was, lest 
they should not be heard by Edgar; and, whenever they ceased, whenever a pause 
and respectful silence took their place, new starts, fresh palpitations, and 
designed false steps, again called them forth; while the smile with which she 
repaid their enthusiastic speaker, was fuel to his flame, but poison to his 
peace.

They had not proceeded far, when they were met by Miss Margland, who, in equal 
trepidation from anger and from fear, was still making the best of her way from 
the bellowing of the bull. Edgar inquired for Sir Hugh, and the rest of the 
party; but she could speak only of Lionel; his insolence and his ill usage; 
protesting nothing but her regard for Indiana, could induce her to live a 
moment longer under his uncle's roof.

'But where,' again cried Edgar, 'where is Sir Hugh? and where are the ladies?'

'Tossed by the bull,' answered she, pettishly, 'for aught I know; I did not 
choose to stay and be tossed myself; and a person like Mr. Lionel can soon make 
such a beast point at one, if he takes it into his humour.'

Edgar then begged they might hasten to their company; but Miss Margland 
positively refused to go back: and Indiana, always ready to second any alarm, 
declared, she should quite sink with fright, if they went within a hundred 
yards of that horrid field. Edgar still pleaded that the baronet would expect 
them; but Melmond, in softer tones, spoke of fears, sensibility, and dangers; 
and Edgar soon found he was talking to the winds.

All now that remained to prevent further separations was, that Edgar should run 
on to the party, and acquaint them that Miss Margland and Indiana would wait 
for them upon the high road.

Melmond, meanwhile, felt in paradise; even the presence of Miss Margland could 
not restrain his rapture, upon a casualty that gave him such a charge, though 
it forced him to forbear making the direct and open declaration of his passion, 
with which his heart was burning, and his tongue quivering. He attended them 
both with the most fervent respect, evidently very gratifying to the object of 
his adoration, though not noticed by Miss Margland, who was wholly absorbed by 
her own provocations.

Edgar soon reached the bank by the road's side, upon which the baronet, Dr. 
Marchmont, Lionel, and Camilla were seated. 'Lord help us!' exclaimed Sir Hugh, 
aghast at his approach, 'if here is not young Mr. Edgar without Indiana! This 
is a thing I could never have expected from you, young Mr. Edgar! that you 
should leave her, I don't know where, and come without her!'

Edgar assured him she was safe, and under the care of Miss Margland, but that 
neither of them could be prevailed with to come farther: he had, therefore, 
advanced to inquire after the rest of the party, and to arrange where they 
should all assemble.

'You have done very right, then, my dear Mr. Edgar, as you always do, as far as 
I can make out, when I come to the bottom. And now I am quite easy about 
Indiana. But as to Eugenia, what Dr. Orkborne has done with her is more than I 
can devise; unless, indeed, they are got to studying some of their Greek verbs, 
and so forgot us all, which is likely enough; only I had rather they had taken 
another time, not much caring to stay here longer than I can help.'

Edgar said, he would make a circuit in search of them; but, first, addressing 
Camilla, 'You alone,' he cried, with an approving smile, 'have remained thus 
quiet, while all else have been scampering apart, making confusion worse 
confounded.'

'I have lived too completely in the country to be afraid of cattle,' she 
answered; 'and Dr. Marchmont assured me there was no danger.'

'You can listen, then, even when you are alarmed,' said he, expressively, 'to 
the voice of reason!'

Camilla raised her eyes, and looked at him, but dropt them again without making 
any answer: Can you, she thought, have been pleading it in vain? How I wonder 
at Indiana?

He then set out to seek Eugenia, recommending the same office to Lionel by 
another route; but Lionel no sooner gathered where Miss Margland might be met 
with, than his repentance was forgotten, and he quitted everything to encounter 
her.

Edgar spent near half an hour in his search, without the smallest success; he 
was then seriously uneasy, and returning to the party, when a countryman, to 
whom he was known, told him he had seen Miss Eugenia Tyrold, with a very 
handsome fine town gentleman, going into a farm house.

Edgar flew to the spot, and through a window, as he advanced, perceived Eugenia 
seated, and Bellamy kneeling before her.

Amazed and concerned, he abruptly made his way into the apartment. Bellamy rose 
in the utmost confusion, and Eugenia, starting and colouring, caught Edgar by 
the arm, but could not speak.

He told her that her uncle and the whole company were waiting for her in great 
anxiety.

'And where, where,' cried she, 'are they? I have been in agonies about them 
all! and I could not prevail—I could not—this gentleman said the risk was 
so great—he would not suffer me—but he has sent for a chaise, though I told 
him I had a thousand times rather hazard my life amongst them, and with them, 
than save it alone!'

'They are all perfectly safe, nor has there ever been any danger.'

'I was told—I was assured—' said Bellamy, 'that a mad bull was running wild 
about the country; and I thought it, therefore, advisable to send for a chaise 
from the nearest inn, that I might return this young lady to her friends.'

Edgar made no answer, but offered his arm to conduct Eugenia to her uncle. She 
accepted it, and Bellamy attended on her other side.

Edgar was silent the whole way. The attitude in which he had surprised Bellamy, 
by assuring him of the nature of his pretensions, had awakened doubts the most 
alarming of the destination in view for the chaise which he had ordered; and he 
believed that Eugenia was either to have been beguiled, or betrayed, into a 
journey the most remote from the home to which she belonged.

Eugenia increased his suspicions by the mere confusion which deterred her from 
removing them. Bellamy had assured her she was in the most eminent personal 
danger, and had hurried her from field to field, with an idea that the dreaded 
animal was in full pursuit. When carried, however, into the farm house, she 
lost all apprehension for herself in fears for her friends, and insisted upon 
sharing their fate. Bellamy, who immediately ordered a chaise, then cast 
himself at her feet, to entreat she would not throw away her life by so rash a 
measure.

Exhausted, from her lameness, she was forced to sit still, and such was their 
situation at the entrance of Edgar. She wished extremely to explain what had 
been the object of the solicitation of Bellamy, and to clear him, as well as 
herself, from any further surmises; but she was ashamed to begin the subject. 
Edgar had seen a man at her feet, and she thought, herself, it was a cruel 
injury to Clermont, though she knew not how to refuse it forgiveness, since it 
was merely to supplicate she would save her own life.

Bellamy, therefore, was the only one who spoke; and his unanswered observations 
contributed but little to enliven the walk.

When they came within sight of the party, the baronet was again seized with the 
extremest dismay. 'Why now, what's this?' cried he; 'here's nothing but 
blunders. Pray, Sir, who gave you authority to take my niece from her own 
tutor? for so I may call him, though more properly speaking, he came amongst us 
to be mine; which, however, is no affair but of our own.'

'Sir,' answered Bellamy, advancing and bowing; 'I hope I have had the happiness 
of rather doing service than mischief; I saw the young lady upon the point of 
destruction, and I hastened her to a place of security, from whence I had 
ordered a post-chaise, to convey her safe to your house.'

'Yes, my dear uncle,' said Eugenia, recovering from her embarrassment; 'I have 
occasioned this gentleman infinite trouble; and though Mr. Mandlebert assures 
us there was no real danger, he thought there was, and therefore I must always 
hold myself to be greatly obliged to him.'

'Well, if that's the case, I must be obliged to him too; which, to tell you the 
truth, is not a thing I am remarkably fond of having happened. But where's Dr. 
Orkborne? I hope he's come to no harm, by his not shewing himself?'

'At the moment of terror,' said Eugenia, 'I accepted the first offer of 
assistance, concluding we were all hurrying away at the same time; but I saw 
Dr. Orkborne no more afterwards.'

'I can't say that was over and above kind of him, nor careful neither,' cried 
Sir Hugh, 'considering some particular reasons; however, where is he now?'

Nobody could say; no one had seen or observed him.

'Why then, ten to one, poor gentleman!' exclaimed the baronet, 'but he's the 
very person himself who's tossed, while we are all of us running away for 
nothing!'

A suspicion now occurred to Dr. Marchmont, which led him to return over the 
stile into the field where the confusion had begun; and there, on the exact 
spot where he had first taken out his tablets, calmly stood Dr. Orkborne; 
looking now upon his writing, now up to the sky, but seeing nothing any where, 
from intense absorption of thought upon the illustration he was framing.

Awakened from his reverie by the Doctor, his first recollection was of Eugenia; 
he had not doubted her remaining quietly by his side, and the moment he looked 
round and missed her, he felt considerable compunction. The good Doctor, 
however, assured him all were safe, and conducted him to the group.

'So here you are,' said the baronet, 'and no more tossed than myself, for which 
I am sincerely thankful, though I can't say I think you have taken much care of 
my niece, nobody knowing what might have become of her, if it had not been for 
that strange gentleman, that I never saw before.'

He then formally placed Eugenia under the care of Dr. Marchmont.

Dr. Orkborne, piqued by this transfer, sullenly followed, and now gave to her, 
pertinaciously, his undivided attention. Drawn by a total revulsion of ideas 
from the chain of thinking that had led him to composition, he relinquished his 
annotations in resentment of this dismission, when he might have pursued them 
uninterruptedly without neglect of other avocations.
