
A few kind Offices

With deep concern Edgar revolved in his mind the suggestions of Dr. Marchmont; 
and meditation, far from diminishing, added importance to the arguments of his 
friend. To obtain the hand of an object he so highly admired, though but lately 
his sole wish, appeared now an uncertain blessing, a suspicious good, since the 
possession of her heart was no longer to be considered as its inseparable 
appendage. His very security of the approbation of Mr. and Mrs. Tyrold became a 
source of solicitude; and, secret from them, from her, and from all, he 
determined to guard his views, till he could find some opportunity of 
investigating her own unbiased sentiments.

Such were his ruminations, when, on re-entering the Park, he perceived her 
wandering alone amidst the trees. Her figure looked so interesting, her air so 
serious, her solitude so attractive, that every maxim of tardy prudence, every 
caution of timid foresight, would instantly have given way to the quick 
feelings of generous impulse, had he not been restrained by his promise to Dr. 
Marchmont. He dismounted, and giving his horse to his groom, re-traced her 
footsteps.

Camilla, almost without her own knowledge, had strolled towards the gate, 
whence she concluded Edgar to have ridden from the Park, and, almost without 
consciousness, had continued sauntering in its vicinity; yet she no sooner 
descried him, than, struck with a species of self-accusation for this 
appearance of awaiting him, she crossed over to the nearest path towards the 
house, and, for the first time, was aware of the approach of Edgar without 
hastening to meet him.

He slackened his pace, to quiet his spirits, and restore his manner to its 
customary serenity, before he permitted himself to overtake her. 'Can you,' he 
then cried, 'forgive me, when you hear I have been fulfilling my own 
appointment, and have postponed my promised investigation?'

'Rather say,' she gently answered, 'could I have forgiven you, if you had shewn 
me you thought my impatience too ungovernable for any delay?'

To find her thus willing to oblige him, was a new delight, and he expressed his 
acknowledgments in terms the most flattering.

An unusual seriousness made her hear him almost without reply; yet peace and 
harmony revisited her mind, and, in listening to his valued praise, she forgot 
her late alarm at her own sensations, and without extending a thought beyond 
the present instant, again felt tranquil and happy: while to Edgar she appeared 
so completely all that was adorable, that he could only remember to repent his 
engagement with Dr. Marchmont.

Her secret opinion that he was dissatisfied with his lot, gave a softness to 
her accents that enchanted him; while the high esteem for his character, which 
mingled with her pity, joined to a lowered sense of her own, from a new-born 
terror lest that pity were too tender, spread a charm wholly new over her 
native fire and vivacity.

In a few minutes, they were overtaken by Mandlebert's gardener, who was 
bringing from Beech Park a basket of flowers for his master. They were selected 
from curious hot-house plants, and Camilla stopt to admire their beauty and 
fragrance.

Edgar presented her the basket; whence she simply took a sprig of myrtle and 
geranium, conceiving the present to be designed for Indiana. 'If you are fond 
of geraniums,' said he, 'there is an almost endless variety in my greenhouse, 
and I will bring you tomorrow some specimens.'

She thanked him, and while he gave orders to the gardener, Miss Margland and 
Indiana advanced from the house.

Miss Margland had seen them from her window, where, in vain deliberation, she 
had been considering what step to take. But, upon beholding them together, she 
thought deliberation and patience were hopeless, and determined, by a decisive 
stroke, to break in its bud the connection she supposed forming, or throw upon 
Camilla all censure, if she failed, as the sole means she could devise to 
exculpate her own sagacity from impeachment. She called upon Indiana, 
therefore, to accompany her into the Park, exclaiming, in an angry tone, 'Miss 
Lynmere, I will shew you the true cause why Mr. Mandlebert does not declare 
himself—your cousin, Miss Camilla, is wheedling him away from you.'

Indiana, whose belief in almost whatever was said, was undisturbed by any 
species of reflection, felt filled with resentment, and a sense of injury, and 
readily following, said—'I was sure there was something more in it than I 
saw, because Mr. Melmond behaved so differently. But I don't take it very kind 
of my cousin, I can tell her!'

They then hurried into the Park; but, as they came without any plan, they were 
no sooner within a few yards of the meeting, than they stopt short, at a loss 
what to say or do.

Edgar, vexed at their interruption, continued talking to the gardener, to avoid 
joining them; but seeing Camilla, who less than ever wished for their 
communications, walk instantly another way, he thought it would be improper to 
pursue her, and only bowing to Miss Margland and Indiana, went into the house.

'This is worse than ever,' cried Miss Margland, 'to stalk off without speaking, 
or even offering you any of his flowers, which, I dare say, are only to be put 
into the parlour flower-pots, for the whole house.'

'I'm sure I'm very glad of it,' said Indiana, for I hate flowers; but I'm sure 
Mr. Melmond would not have done so; nor Colonel Andover; nor Mr. Macdersey more 
than all.'

'No, nor any body else, my dear, that had common sense, and their eyes open; 
nor Mr. Mandlebert neither, if it were not for Miss Camilla. However, we'll let 
her know we see what she is about; and let Sir Hugh know too: for as to the 
colonels, and the ensigns, and that young Oxford student, they won't at all do; 
officers are commonly worth nothing; and scholars, you may take my word for it, 
my dear, are the dullest men in the world. Besides, one would not give such a 
fine fortune as Mr. Mandlebert's without making a little struggle for it. You 
don't know how many pretty things you may do with it. So let us shew her we 
don't want for spirit, and speak to her at once.'

These words, reviving in the mind of Indiana her wedding clothes, the train of 
servants, and the new equipage, gave fresh pique to her provocation: but 
finding some difficulty to overtake the fleet Camilla, whose pace kept measure 
with her wish to avoid them, she called after her, to desire she would not walk 
so fast.

Camilla reluctantly loitered, but without stopping or turning to meet them, 
that she might still regale herself with the perfume of the geranium presented 
her by Edgar.

'You're in great haste, ma'am,' said Miss Margland, 'which I own I did not 
observe to be the case just now!'

Camilla, in much surprize, asked, what she meant.

'My meaning is pretty plain, I believe, to any body that chose to understand 
it. However, though Miss Lynmere scorns to be her own champion, I cannot, as a 
friend, be quite so passive, nor help hinting to you, how little you would like 
such a proceeding to yourself, from any other person.'

'What proceeding?' cried Camilla, blushing, from a dawning comprehension of the 
subject, though resenting the manner of the complaint.

'Nay, only ask yourself, ma'am, only ask yourself, Miss Camilla, how you should 
like to be so supplanted, if such an establishment were forming for yourself, 
and every thing were fixt, and every body else refused, and nobody to hinder 
its all taking place, but a near relation of your own, who ought to be the 
first to help it forward. I should like to know, I say, Miss Camilla, how you 
would feel, if it were your own case?'

Astonished and indignant at so sudden and violent an assault, Camilla stood 
suspended, whether to deign any vindication, or to walk silently away: yet its 
implications involuntarily filled her with a thousand other, and less offending 
emotions than those of anger, and a general confusion crimsoned her cheeks.

'You cannot but be sensible, ma'am,' resumed Miss Margland, 'for sense is not 
what you want, that you have seduced Mr. Mandlebert from your cousin; you 
cannot but see he takes hardly the smallest notice of her, from the pains you 
are at to make him admire nobody but yourself.'

The spirit of Camilla now rose high to her aid, at a charge thus impertinent 
and unjust. 'Miss Margland,' she cried, 'you shock and amaze me! I am at a loss 
for any motive to so cruel an accusation: but you, I hope at least, my dear 
Indiana, are convinced how much it injures me.' She would then have taken the 
hand of Indiana, but disdainfully drawing it back, 'I shan't break my heart 
about it, I assure you,' she cried, 'you are vastly welcome to him for me; I 
hope I am not quite so odious, but I may find other people in the world besides 
Mr. Mandlebert!'

'O, as to that,' said Miss Margland, 'I am sure you have only to look in order 
to chuse; but since this affair has been settled by your uncle, I can't say I 
think it very grateful in any person to try to overset his particular wishes. 
Poor old gentleman! I'm sure I pity him! It will go hard enough with him, when 
he comes to hear it! Such a requital!—and from his own niece!'

This was an attack the most offensive that Camilla could receive; nothing could 
so nearly touch her as an idea of ingratitude to her uncle, and resting upon 
that, the whole tide of those feelings which were, in fact, divided and 
subdivided into many crossing channels, she broke forth, with great eagerness, 
into exclaiming, 'Miss Margland, this is quite barbarous! You know, and you, 
Indiana, cannot but know, I would not give my uncle the smallest pain, to be 
mistress of a thousand universes!'

'Why, then,' said Miss Margland, 'should you break up a scheme which he has so 
much set his heart upon? Why are you always winning over Mr. Mandlebert to 
yourself, by all that flattery? Why are you always consulting him? always 
obliging him? always of his opinion? always ready to take his advice?'

'Miss Margland,' replied Camilla, with the extremest agitation, 'this is so 
unexpected—so undeserved an interpretation,—my consultation, or my 
acquiescence have been merely from respect; no other thought, no other 
motive—Good God! what is it you imagine?—what guilt would you impute to me?'

'O dear,' cried Indiana, 'pray don't suppose it signifies. If you like to make 
compliments in that manner to gentlemen, pray do it. I hope I shall always hold 
myself above it. I think it's their place to make compliments to me.'

A resentful answer was rising to the tongue of Camilla, when she perceived her 
two little sprigs, which in her recent disorder she had dropt, were demolishing 
under the feet of Indiana, who, with apparent unmeaningness, but internal 
suspicion of their giver, had trampled upon them both. Hastily stooping she 
picked them up, and, with evident vexation, was blowing from them the dust and 
dirt, when Indiana scoffingly said, 'I wonder where you got that geranium?'

'I don't wonder at all,' said Miss Margland, 'for Sir Hugh has none of that 
species; so one may easily guess.'

Camilla felt herself blush, and letting the flowers fall, turned to Indiana, 
and said, 'Cousin, if on my account, it is possible you can suffer the smallest 
uneasiness, tell me but what I shall do—you shall dictate to me—you shall 
command me.'

Indiana disclaimed all interest in her behaviour; but Miss Margland cried, 
'What you can do, ma'am, is this, and nothing can be easier, nor fairer: leave 
off paying all that court to Mr. Mandlebert, of asking his advice, and follow 
your own way, whether he likes it or not, and go to see Mrs. Arlbery, and Mrs. 
every body else, when you have a mind, without waiting for his permission, or 
troubling yourself about what he thinks of it.'

Camilla now trembled in every joint, and with difficulty restrained from tears, 
while, timidly, she said—'And do you, my dear Indiana, demand of me this 
conduct? and will it, at least, satisfy you?'

'Me? O dear no! I demand nothing, I assure you. The whole matter is quite 
indifferent to me, and you may ask his leave for every thing in the world, if 
you chuse it. There are people enough ready to take my part, I hope, if you set 
him against me ever so much.'

'Indeed, indeed, Indiana,' said Camilla, overpowered with conflicting 
sensations, 'this is using me very unkindly!' And, without waiting to hear 
another word, she hurried into the house, and flew to hide herself in her own 
room.

This was the first bitter moment she had ever known. Peace, gay though uniform, 
had been the constant inmate of her breast, enjoyed without thought, possessed 
without struggle; not the subdued gift of accommodating philosophy, but the 
inborn and genial produce of youthful felicity's best aliment, the energy of 
its own animal spirits.

She had, indeed, for some time past, thought Edgar, of too refined and too 
susceptible a character for the unthinking and undistinguishing Indiana; and 
for the last day or two, her regret at his fate had strengthened itself into an 
averseness of his supposed destination, that made the idea of it painful, and 
the subject repugnant to her; but she had never, till this very morning, 
distrusted the innoxiousness either of her pity or her regard; and, startled at 
the first surmise of danger, she had wished to fly even from herself, rather 
than venture to investigate feelings so unwelcome; yet still and invariably, 
she had concluded Edgar the future husband of Indiana.

To hear there were any doubts of the intended marriage, filled her with 
emotions indefinable; to hear herself named as the cause of those doubts, was 
alarming both to her integrity and her delicacy. She felt the extremest anger 
at the unprovoked and unwarrantable harshness of Miss Margland, and a 
resentment nearly equal at the determined petulance, and unjustifiable 
aspersions of Indiana.

Satisfied of the innocence of her intentions, she knew, not what alteration she 
could make in her behaviour; and, after various plans, concluded, that to make 
none would best manifest her freedom from self-reproach. At the summons 
therefore to dinner, she was the first to appear, eager to shew herself unmoved 
by the injustice of her accusers, and desirous to convince them she was 
fearless of examination.

Yet, too much discomposed to talk in her usual manner, she seized upon a book 
till the party was seated. Answering then to the call of her uncle, with as 
easy an air as she could assume, she took her accustomed place by his side, and 
began, for mere employment, filling a plate from the dish that was nearest to 
her; which she gave to the footman, without any direction whither to carry, or 
enquiry if any body chose to eat it.

It was taken round the table, and, though refused by all, she heaped up another 
plate, with the same diligence and speed as if it had been accepted.

Edgar, who had been accidentally detained, only now entered, apologizing for 
being so late.

Engrossed by the pride of self-defence, and the indignancy of unmerited 
unkindness, the disturbed mind of Camilla had not yet formed one separate 
reflexion, nor even admitted a distinct idea of Edgar himself, disengaged from 
the accusation in which he stood involved. But he had now amply his turn. The 
moment he appeared, the deepest blushes covered her face; and an emotion so 
powerful beat in her breast, that the immediate impulse of her impetuous 
feelings, was to declare herself ill, and run out of the room.

With this view she rose; but ashamed of her plan, seated herself the next 
moment, though she had first overturned her plate and a sauce-boat in the 
vehemence of her haste.

This accident rather recovered than disconcerted her, by affording an 
unaffected occupation, in begging pardon of Sir Hugh, who was the chief 
sufferer, changing the napkins, and restoring the table to order.

'What upon earth can be the matter with Miss Camilla, I can't guess!' exclaimed 
Miss Margland, though with an expression of spite that fully contradicted her 
difficulty of conjecture.

'I hope,' said Edgar surprized, 'Miss Camilla is not ill?'

'I can't say I think my cousin looks very bad!' said Indiana.

Camilla, who was rubbing a part of her gown upon which nothing had fallen, 
affected to be too busy to hear them: which Sir Hugh, concluding her silent 
from shame, entreated her not to think of his cloaths, which were worth no 
great matter, not being his best by two or three suits. Her thoughts had not 
waited this injunction; yet it was in vain she strove to behave as if nothing 
had happened. Her spirit instigated, but it would not support her; her voice 
grew husky, she stammered, forgot, as she went on, what she designed to say 
when she began speaking, and frequently was forced to stop short, with a faint 
laugh at herself, and with a colour every moment encreasing. And the very 
instant the cloth was removed, she rose, unable to constrain herself any 
longer, and ran up stairs to her own room.

There all her efforts evaporated in tears. 'Cruel, cruel, Miss Margland,' she 
cried, 'unjust, unkind Indiana! how have I merited this treatment! What can 
Edgar think of my disturbance? What can I devise to keep from his knowledge the 
barbarous accusation which has caused it?'

In a few minutes she heard the step of Eugenia.

Ashamed, she hastily wiped her eyes; and before the door could be opened, was 
at the further end of the room, looking into one of her drawers.

'What is it that has vexed my dearest Camilla?' cried her kind sister, 
'something I am sure has grieved her.'

'I cannot guess what I have done with—I can no where find—' stammered 
Camilla, engaged in some apparent search, but too much confused to name 
anything of which she might probably be in want.

Eugenia desired to assist her, but a servant came to the door, to tell them 
that the company was going to the summer-house, whither Sir Hugh begged they 
would follow.

Camilla besought Eugenia to join them, and make her excuses: but, fearing Miss 
Margland would attribute her absconding to guilt, or cowardice, she bathed her 
eyes in cold water, and overtook her sister at the stairs of the little 
building.

In ascending them, she heard Miss Margland say, 'I dare believe nothing's the 
matter but some whim; for to be sure as to whims, Miss Camilla has the most of 
any creature I ever saw, and Miss Lynmere the least; for you may imagine, Mr. 
Mandlebert, I have pretty good opportunity to see all these young people in 
their real colours.'

Overset by this malignancy, she was again flying to the refuge of her own room, 
and the relief of tears, when the conviction of such positive ill-will in Miss 
Margland, for which she could assign no reason, but her unjust and exclusive 
partiality to Indiana, checked her precipitancy. She feared she would construe 
to still another whim her non-appearance, and resuming a little fresh strength 
from fresh resentment, turned back; but the various keen sensations she 
experienced as she entered the summer-house, rendered this little action the 
most severe stretch of fortitude, her short and happy life had yet called upon 
her to make.

Sir Hugh addressed her some kind enquiries, which she hastily answered, while 
she pretended to be busy in preparing to wind some sewing silk upon cards.

She could have chosen no employment less adapted to display the cool 
indifference she wished to manifest to Miss Margland and Indiana. She pulled 
the silk the wrong way, twisted, twirled, and entangled it continually; and 
while she talked volubly of what she was about, as if it were the sole subject 
of her thoughts, her shaking hands shewed her whole frame disordered, and her 
high colour betrayed her strong internal emotion.

Edgar looked at her with surprize and concern. What had dropt from Miss 
Margland of her whims, he had heard with disdain; for, without suspecting her 
of malice to Camilla, he concluded her warped by her prejudice in favour of 
Indiana. Dr. Marchmont, however, had bid him judge by proof, not appearance; 
and he resolved therefore to investigate the cause of this disquiet, before he 
acted upon his belief in its blamelessness.

Having completely spoilt one skein, she threw it aside, and saying 'the 
weather's so fine, I cannot bear to stay within,'—left her silk, her winders, 
and her work-bag, on the first chair, and skipt down the stairs.

Sir Hugh declined walking, but would let nobody remain with him. Edgar, as if 
studying the clouds, glided down first. Camilla, perceiving him, bent her head, 
and began gathering some flowers. He stood by her a moment in silence, and then 
said: 'To-morrow morning, without fail, I will wait upon Mrs. Needham.'

'Pray take your own time. I am not in any haste.'

'You are very good, and I am more obliged to you than I can express, for 
suffering my officious interference with such patience.'

A rustling of silk made Camilla now look up, and she perceived Miss Margland 
leaning half out of the window of the summer-house, from earnestness to catch 
what she said.

Angry thus to be watched, and persuaded that both innocence and dignity called 
upon her to make no change in her open consideration for Edgar, she answered, 
in a voice that strove to be more audible, but that irresistibly trembled, 'I 
beg you will impartially consult your own judgment, and decide as you think 
right.'

Edgar, now, became as little composed as herself: the power with which she 
invested him, possessed a charm to dissolve every hesitating doubt; and when, 
upon her raising her head, he perceived the redness of her eyes, and found that 
the perturbation which had perplexed him was mingled with some affliction, the 
most tender anxiety filled his mind, and though somewhat checked by the 
vicinity of Miss Margland, his voice expressed the warmest solicitude, as he 
said, 'I know not how to thank you for this sweetness; but I fear something 
disturbs you?—I fear you are not well, or are not happy?'

Camilla again bent over the flowers; but it was not to scent their fragrance; 
she sought only a hiding place for her eyes, which were gushing with tears; and 
though she wished to fly a thousand miles off, she had not courage to take a 
single step, nor force to trust her voice with the shortest reply.

'You will not speak? yet you do not deny that you have some uneasiness?—Could 
I give it but the smallest relief, how fortunate I should think myself!—And 
is it quite impossible?—Do you forbid me to ask what it is?—forbid me the 
indulgence even to suggest——'

'Ask nothing! suggest nothing! and think of it no more!' interrupted Camilla, 
'if you would not make me quite——'

She stopt suddenly, not to utter the word unhappy, of which she felt the 
improper strength at the moment it was quivering on her lips, and leaving her 
sentence unfinished, abruptly walked away.

Edgar could not presume to follow, yet felt her conquest irresistible. Her 
self-denial with regard to Mrs. Arlbery won his highest approbation; her 
compliance with his wishes convinced him of her esteem; and her distress, so 
new and so unaccountable, centered every wish of his heart in a desire to 
solace, and to revive her.

To obtain this privilege hastened at once and determined his measures; he 
excused himself, therefore, from walking, and went instantly to his chamber, to 
reclaim, by a hasty letter to Dr. Marchmont, his procrastinating promise.
