
A Pro and a Con

With a pen flowing quick from feelings of the most generous warmth, Edgar wrote 
the following letter:

To Dr. Marchmont.

Accuse me not of precipitance, my dear Doctor, nor believe me capable of 
forgetting the wisdom of your suggestions, nor of lightly weighing those evils 
with which your zeal has encompassed me, though I write at this instant to 
confess a total contrariety of sentiment, to call back every promise of delay, 
and to make an unqualified avowal, that the period of caution is past! Camilla 
is not happy—something, I know not what, has disturbed the gay serenity of 
her bosom: she has forbid me to enquire the cause;—one way only remains to 
give me a claim to her confidence.—O Doctor! wonder not if cold, tardy, 
suspicious—I had nearly said unfeeling, caution, shrinks at such a moment, 
from the rising influence of warmer sympathy, which bids me sooth her in 
distress, shield her from danger, strengthen all her virtues, and participate 
in their emanations!

You will not do me the injustice to think me either impelled or blinded by 
external enchantments; you know me to have withstood their yet fuller blaze in 
her cousin: O no! were she despoiled of all personal attraction by the same 
ravaging distemper that has been so fierce with her poor sister; were a similar 
cruel accident to rob her form of all symmetry, she would yet be more 
fascinating to my soul, by one single look, one single word, one sweet beaming 
smile, diffusing all the gaiety it displays, than all of beauty, all of 
elegance, all of rank, all of wealth, the whole kingdom, in some wonderful 
aggregate, could oppose to her.

Her face, her form, however penetrating in loveliness, aid, but do not 
constitute, her charms; no, 'tis the quick intelligence of soul that mounts to 
her eyes, 'tis the spirit checked by sweetness, the sweetness animated by 
spirit, the nature so nobly above all artifice, all study—O Doctor! restore 
to me immediately every vestige, every trait of any promise, any acquiescence, 
any idea the most distant, that can be construed into a compliance with one 
moment's requisition of delay!

Edgar Mandlebert.

Cleves Park, Friday Evening.

Camilla, meanwhile, shut up in her room, wept almost without cessation, from a 
sense of general unhappiness, though fixed to no point, and from a disturbance 
of mind, a confusion of ideas and of feelings, that rendered her incapable of 
reflection. She was again followed by Eugenia, and could no longer refuse, to 
her tender anxiety, a short detail of the attack which occasioned her disorder; 
happy, at least, in reciting it, that by unfolding the cause, there no longer 
remained any necessity to repress the effects of her affliction.

To her great surprise, however, Eugenia only said: 'And is this all, my dear 
Camilla?'

'All!' exclaimed Camilla.

'Yes, is it all?—I was afraid some great misfortune had happened.'

'And what could happen more painful, more shocking, more cruel?'

'A thousand things! for this is nothing but a mere mistake; and you should not 
make yourself unhappy about it, because you are not to blame.'

'Is it then nothing to be accused of designs and intentions so criminal?'

'If the accusation were just, it might indeed make you wretched: but it is Miss 
Margland only who has any reason to be afflicted; for it is she alone who has 
been in the wrong.'

Struck with this plain but uncontrovertible truth, Camilla wiped her eyes, and 
strove to recover some composure; but finding her tears still force their way, 
'It is not,' she cried, with some hesitation, 'it is not the aspersions of Miss 
Margland alone that give me so much vexation—the unkindness of Indiana—'

'Indeed she is highly reprehensible; and so I will tell her;—but still, if 
she has any fears, however ill-founded, of losing Edgar, you cannot but 
pardon—you must even pity her.'

Struck again, and still more forcibly, by this second truth, Camilla, ashamed 
of her grief, made a stronger and more serious effort to repress it; and 
receiving soon afterwards a summons from her uncle, her spirit rose once more 
to the relief of her dejection, upon seeing him seated between Miss Margland 
and Indiana, and discerning that they had been making some successful 
complaint, by the air of triumph with which they waited her approach.

'My dear Camilla,' he cried, with a look of much disturbance, 'here's a sad 
ado, I find; though I don't mean to blame you, nor young Mr. Mandlebert 
neither, taste being a fault one can't avoid; not but what a person's changing 
their mind is what I can't commend in any one, which I shall certainly let him 
know, not doubting to bring him round by means of his own sense: only, my dear, 
in the meanwhile, I must beg you not to stand in your cousin's way.'

'Indeed, my dear uncle, I do not merit this imputation; I am not capable of 
such treachery!' indignantly answered Camilla.

'Treachery! Lord help us! treachery!' cried Sir Hugh, fondly embracing her, 
'don't I know you are as innocent as the baby unborn? and more innocent too, 
from the advantage of having more sense to guide you by! treachery, my dear 
Camilla! why, I think there's nobody so good in the wide world!—by which I 
mean no reflections, never thinking it right to make any.'

Indiana, sullenly pouting, spoke not a word; but Miss Margland, with a tone of 
plausibility that was some covert to its malice, said 'Why then all may be 
well, and the young ladies as good friends as ever, and Mr. Mandlebert return 
to the conduct of a gentleman, only just by Miss Camilla's doing as she would 
be done by; for nothing that all of us can say will have any effect, if she 
does not discourage him from dangling about after her in the manner he does 
now, speaking to nobody else, and always asking her opinion about every trifle, 
which is certainly doing no great justice to Miss Lynmere.'

Indiana, with a toss of the head, protested his notice was the last thing she 
desired.

'My dear Indiana,' said Sir Hugh, 'don't mind all that outward shew. Mr. 
Mandlebert is a very good boy, and as to your cousin Camilla, I am sure I need 
not put you in mind how much she is the same; but I really think, whatever's 
the reason, the young youths of now-a-days grow backwarder and backwarder. 
Though I can't say but what in my time it was just the same; witness myself; 
which is what I have been sorry for often enough, though I have left off 
repenting it now, because it's of no use; age being a thing there's no getting 
ahead of.'

'Well, then, all that remains is this,' said Miss Margland, 'let Miss Camilla 
keep out of Mr. Mandlebert's way; and let her order the carriage, and go to 
Mrs. Arlbery's to-morrow, and take no notice of his likings and dislikings; and 
I'll be bound for it he will soon think no more of her, and then, of course, he 
will give the proper attention to Miss Lynmere.'

'O, if that's all,' cried Sir Hugh, 'my dear Camilla, I am sure, will do it, 
and as much again too, to make her cousin easy. And so now, I hope, all is 
settled, and my two good girls will kiss one another, and be friends; which I 
am sure I am myself, with all my heart.'

Camilla hung her head, in speechless perturbation, at a task which appeared to 
her equally hard and unjust; but while fear and shame kept her silent, Sir Hugh 
drew her to Indiana, and a cold, yet unavoidable salute, gave a species of 
tacit consent to a plan which she did not dare oppose, from the very strength 
of the desire that urged her opposition.

They then separated; Sir Hugh delighted, Miss Margland triumphant, Indiana half 
satisfied, half affronted, and Camilla with a mind so crowded, a heart so full, 
she scarcely breathed. Sensations the most contrary, of pain, pleasure, hope, 
and terror, at once assailed her. Edgar, of whom so long she had only thought 
as of the destined husband of Indiana, she now heard named with suspicions of 
another regard, to which she did not dare give full extension; yet of which the 
most distant surmise made her consider herself, for a moment, as the happiest 
of human beings, though she held herself the next as the most culpable for even 
wishing it.

She found Eugenia still in her room, who, perceiving her increased emotion, 
tenderly enquired, if there were any new cause.

'Alas! yes, my dearest Eugenia! they have been exacting from me the most cruel 
of sacrifices! They order me to fly from Edgar Mandlebert—to resist his 
advice—to take the very measures I have promised to forbear—to disoblige, 
to slight, to behave to him even offensively! my uncle himself, lenient, kind, 
indulgent as he is, my uncle himself has been prevailed with to inflict upon me 
this terrible injunction.'

'My uncle,' answered Eugenia, 'is incapable of giving pain to any body, and 
least of all to you, whom he loves with such fondness; he has not therefore 
comprehended the affair; he only considers, in general, that to please or to 
displease Edgar Mandlebert can be a matter of no moment to you, when compared 
with its importance to Indiana.'

'It is a thousand and a thousand, a million and a million times more important 
to me, than it can ever be to her!' exclaimed the ardent Camilla, 'for she 
values not his kindness, she knows not his worth, she is insensible to his 
virtues!'

'You judge too hastily, my dear Camilla; she has not indeed your warmth of 
heart; but if she did not wish the union to take place, why would she shew all 
this disquiet in the apprehension of its breach?'

Camilla, surprised into recollection, endeavoured to become calmer.

'You, indeed,' continued the temperate Eugenia, 'if so situated, would not so 
have behaved; you would not have been so unjust; and you could not have been so 
weak; but still, if you had received, however causelessly, any alarm for the 
affection of the man you meant to marry, and that man were as amiable as Edgar, 
you would have been equally disturbed.'

Camilla, convinced, yet shocked, felt the flutter of her heart give a thousand 
hues to her face, and walking to the window, leaned far out to gasp for breath.

'Weigh the request more coolly, and you cannot refuse a short compliance. I am 
sure you would not make Indiana unhappy.'

'O, no! not for the world!' cried she, struggling to seem more reasonable than 
she felt.

'Yet how can she be otherwise, if she imagines you have more of the notice and 
esteem of Edgar than herself?'

Camilla now had not a word to say; the subject dropt; she took up a book, and 
by earnest internal remonstrances, commanded herself to appear at tea-time with 
tolerable serenity.

The evening was passed in spiritless conversation, or in listening to the 
piano-forte, upon which Indiana, with the utmost difficulty, played some very 
easy lessons.

At night, the following answer arrived from Dr. Marchmont:

To Edgar Mandlebert, Esq.

Parsonage House, Cleves,
Friday Night.          

My Dear Friend,

I must be thankful, in a moment of such enthusiasm, that you can pay the 
attention of even recollecting those evils with which my zeal only has, you 
think, encompassed you. I cannot insist upon the practice of caution which you 
deem unfounded; but as you wait my answer, I will once more open upon my 
sentiments, and communicate my wishes. It is now only I can speak them; the 
instant you have informed the young lady of your own, silences them for ever. 
Your honour and her happiness become then entangled in each other, and I know 
not which I would least willingly assail. What in all men is base, would to 
you, I believe, be impossible—to trifle with such favour as may be the growth 
of your own undisguised partiality.

Your present vehemence to ascertain the permanent possession of one you 
conceive formed for your felicity, obscures, to your now absorbed faculties, 
the thousand nameless, but tenacious, delicacies annexed by your species of 
character to your powers of enjoyment. In two words, then, let me tell you, 
what, in a short time, you will daily tell yourself: you cannot be happy if not 
exclusively loved; for you cannot excite, you cannot bestow happiness.

By exclusively, I do not mean to the exclusion of other connections and regard; 
far from it; those who covet in a bride the oblivion of all former friendships, 
all early affections, weaken the finest ties of humanity, and dissolve the 
first compact of unregistered but genuine integrity. The husband, who would 
rather rationally than with romance be loved himself, should seek to cherish, 
not obliterate the kind feelings of nature in its first expansions. These, 
where properly bestowed, are the guarantees to that constant and respectable 
tenderness, which a narrow and selfish jealousy rarely fails to convert into 
distaste and disgust.

The partiality which I mean you to ascertain, injures not these prior claims; I 
mean but a partiality exclusive of your situation in life, and of all 
declaration of your passion: a partiality, in fine, that is appropriate to 
yourself, not to the rank in the world with which you may tempt her ambition, 
nor to the blandishments of flattery, which only soften the heart by 
intoxicating the understanding.

Observe, therefore, if your general character, and usual conduct, strike her 
mind; if her esteem is yours without the attraction of assiduity and adulation; 
if your natural disposition and manners make your society grateful to her, and 
your approbation desirable.

It is thus alone you can secure your own contentment; for it is thus alone your 
reflecting mind can snatch from the time to come the dangerous surmises of a 
dubious retrospection.

Remember, you can always advance; you can never, in honour, go back; and 
believe me when I tell you, that the mere simple avowal of preference, which 
only ultimately binds the man, is frequently what first captivates the woman. 
If her mind is not previously occupied, it operates with such seductive sway, 
it so soothes, so flatters, so bewitches her self-complacency, that while she 
listens, she imperceptibly fancies she participates in sentiments, which, but 
the minute before, occurred not even to her imagination; and while her hand is 
the recompence of her own eulogy, she is not herself aware if she has bestowed 
it where her esteem and regard, unbiassed by the eloquence of acknowledged 
admiration, would have wished it sought, or if it has simply been the boon of 
her own gratified vanity.

I now no longer urge your acquiescence, my dear friend; I merely entreat you 
twice to peruse what I have written, and then leave you to act by the result of 
such perusal.

I remain                              
Your truly faithful and obliged                    
Gabriel Marchmont.

Edgar ran through this letter with an impatience wholly foreign to his general 
character. 'Why,' cried he, 'will he thus obtrude upon me these fastidious 
doubts and causeless difficulties? I begged but the restitution of my promise, 
and he gives it me in words that nearly annihilate my power of using it.'

Disappointed and displeased, he hastily put it into his pocket-book, resolving 
to seek Camilla, and commit the consequences of an interview to the impulses it 
might awaken.

He was half way down stairs, when the sentence finishing with, 'you cannot 
excite, you cannot bestow happiness,' confusedly recurred to him: 'If in that,' 
thought he, 'I fail, I am a stranger to it myself, and a stranger for ever;' 
and, returning to his room, he re-opened the letter to look for the passage.

The sentence lost nothing by being read a second time; he paused upon it 
dejectedly, and presently re-read the whole epistle.

'He is not quite wrong!' cried he, pensively; 'there is nothing very 
unreasonable in what he urges: true, indeed, it is, that I can never be happy 
myself, if her happiness is not entwined around my own.'

The first blight thus borne to that ardent glee with which the imagination 
rewards its own elevated speculations, he yet a third time read the letter.

'He is right!' he then cried; 'I will investigate her sentiments, and know what 
are my chances for her regard; what I owe to real approbation; and what merely 
to intimacy of situation. I will postpone all explanation till my visit here 
expires, and devote the probationary interval, to an examination which shall 
obviate all danger of either deceiving my own reason, or of beguiling her 
inconsiderate acceptance.'

This settled, he rejoiced in a mastery over his eagerness, which he considered 
as complete, since it would defer for no less than a week the declaration of 
his passion.
