
An internal Detection

When the chaise drove from Cleves Park, all attempt at any disguise was over 
with Camilla, who alive only to the horror of appearing ungrateful to Edgar, 
wept without controul; and, leaning back in the carriage, entreated Eugenia to 
dispense with all conversation.

Eugenia, filled with pity, wondered, but complied, and they travelled near four 
miles in silence; when, perceiving, over the paling round a paddock, Mrs. 
Arlbery and a party of company, Camilla dried her eyes, and prepared for her 
visit, of which the impetuosity of her feelings had retarded all previous 
consideration.

Eugenia, with true concern, saw the unfitness of her sister to appear, and 
proposed walking the rest of the way, in the hope that a little air and 
exercise might compose her spirits.

She agreed; they alighted, and bidding the footman keep with the carriage, 
which they ordered should drive slowly behind, they proceeded gently, arm in 
arm, along a clean raised bank by the side of the road, with a pace suiting at 
once the infirmity of Eugenia, and the wish of delay in Camilla.

The sound of voices reached them from within the paddock, though a thick 
shrubbery prevented their seeing the interlocutors.

'Can you make out the arms?' said one.

'No,' answered another, 'but I can see the postillion's livery, and I am 
certain it is Sir Hugh Tyrold's.'

'Then it is not coming hither,' said a third voice, which they recollected for 
Mrs. Arlbery's; 'we don't visit: though I should not dislike to see the old 
baronet. They tell me [he] is a humorist; and I have a taste for all oddities: 
but then he has a house full of females, and females I never admit in a 
morning, except when I have secured some men to take the entertaining them off 
my hands.'

'Whither is Bellamy running?' cried another voice, 'he's off without a word.'

'Gone in hopes of a rencounter, I doubt not,' answered Mrs. Arlbery; 'he made 
palpable aim at one of the divinities of Cleves at the ball.'

Eugenia now grew uneasy. 'Let us be quick,' she whispered 'and enter the house!'

'Divinities! Lord! are they divinities?' said a girlish female voice; 'pray how 
old are they?'

'I fancy about seventeen.'

'Seventeen! gracious! I thought they'd been quite young; I wonder they a'n't 
married!'

'I presume, then, you intend to be more expeditious?' said another, whose voice 
spoke him to be General Kinsale.

'Gracious! I hope so, for I hate an old bride. I'll never marry at all, if I 
stay till I am eighteen.'

'A story goes about,' said the General, 'that Sir Hugh Tyrold has selected one 
of his nieces for his sole heiress; but no two people agree which it is; they 
have asserted it of each.'

'I was mightily taken with one of the girls,' said Mrs. Arlbery; 'there was 
something so pleasant in her looks and manner, that I even felt inclined to 
forgive her being younger and prettier than myself; but she turned out also to 
be more whimsical—and that there was no enduring.'

Camilla, extremely ashamed, was now upon the point of begging Eugenia to 
return, when a new speech seized all her attention.

'Do you know, General, when that beautiful automaton, Miss Lynmere, is to marry 
young Mandlebert?'

'Immediately, I understand; I am told he has fitted up his house very elegantly 
for her reception.'

A deep sigh escaped Camilla at such publicity in the report and belief of the 
engagement of Edgar with her cousin, and brought with it a consciousness too 
strong for any further self-disguise, that her distress flowed not all from an 
unjust accusation: the sound alone of the union struck as a dagger at her 
heart, and told her, incontrovertibly, who was its master.

Her sensations were now most painful: she grew pale, she became sick, and was 
obliged, in her turn, to lean upon Eugenia, who, affrighted to see her thus 
strangely disordered, besought her to go back to the chaise.

She consented, and begged to pass a few minutes there alone. Eugenia therefore 
stayed without, walking slowly upon the bank.

Camilla, getting into the carriage, pulled up the blinds, and, no longer 
self-deceived, lamented in a new burst of sorrow, her unhappy fate, and 
unpropitious attachment.

This consciousness, however, became soon a call upon her integrity, and her 
regret was succeeded by a summons upon propriety. She gave herself up as lost 
to all personal felicity, but hoped she had discovered the tendency of her 
affliction, in time to avoid the dangers, and the errors to which it might 
lead. She determined to struggle without cessation for the conquest of a 
partiality she deemed it treachery to indulge; and to appease any pain she now 
blushed to have caused to Indiana, by strictly following the hard prescription 
of Miss Margland, and the obvious opinion of Eugenia, in shunning the society, 
and no longer coveting the approbation of Edgar. 'Such, my dear father,' she 
cried, 'would be your lesson, if I dared consult you! such, my most honoured 
mother, would be your conduct, if thus cruelly situated!'

This thought thrilled through every vein with pleasure, in a sense of filial 
desert, and her sole desire was to return immediately to those incomparable 
parents, under whose roof she had experienced nothing but happiness, and in 
whose bosoms she hoped to bury every tumultuous disturbance.

These ideas and resolutions, dejecting, yet solacing, occupied her to the 
forgetfulness of her intended visit, and even of Eugenia, till the words: 'Pray 
let me come to you, my dear Camilla!' made her let down the blinds.

She then perceived Mr. Bellamy earnestly addressing her sister.

He had advanced suddenly towards her, by a short cut from the paddock, of which 
she was not aware, when she was about twenty yards from the chaise.

She made an effort to avoid him; but he planted himself in the way of her 
retreat, though with an air of supplication, with which she strove in vain to 
be angry.

He warmly represented the cruelty of thus flying him, entreated but the 
privilege of addressing her as a common acquaintance; and promised, upon that 
condition, to submit unmurmuring to her rejection.

Eugenia, though in secret she thought this request but equitable, made him no 
answer.

'O madam,' he cried, 'what have I not suffered since your barbarous letter! why 
will you be so amiable, yet so inexorable?'

She attempted to quicken her pace; but again, in the same manner, stopping her, 
he exclaimed: 'Do not kill me by this disdain! I ask not now for favour or 
encouragement—I know my hard doom—I ask only to converse with you—though, 
alas! it was by conversing with you I lost my heart.'

Eugenia felt softened; and her countenance, which had forfeited nothing of 
expression, though every thing of beauty, soon shewed Bellamy his advantage. He 
pursued it eagerly; depicted his passion, deprecated her severity, extolled her 
virtues and accomplishments, and bewailed his unhappy, hopeless flame.

Eugenia, knowing that all she said, and believing that all she heard issued 
from the fountain of truth, became extremely distressed. 'Let me pass, I 
conjure you, Sir,' she cried, 'and do not take it ill—but I cannot hear you 
any longer.'

The vivacity of bright hope flashed into the sparkling eyes of Bellamy, at so 
gentle a remonstrance; and entreaties for lenity, declarations of passion, 
professions of submission, and practice of resistance, assailed the young 
Eugenia with a rapidity that confounded her: she heard him with scarce any 
opposition, from a fear of irritating his feelings, joined to a juvenile 
embarrassment how to treat with more severity so sincere and so humble a 
suppliant.

From this situation, to the extreme provocation of Bellamy, she was relieved by 
the appearance of Major Cerwood, who having observed, from the paddock, the 
slow motion of the carriage, had come forth to find out the cause.

Eugenia seized the moment of interruption to press forward, and make the call 
to her sister already mentioned; Bellamy accompanying and pleading, but no 
longer venturing to stop her: he handed her, therefore, to the chaise, where 
Major Cerwood also paid his compliments to the two ladies; and hearing they 
were going to the seat of Mrs. Arlbery, whither Camilla now forced herself, 
though more unwillingly than ever, he ran on, with Bellamy, to be ready to hand 
them from the carriage.

They were shewn into a parlour, while a servant went into the garden to call 
his mistress.

This interval was not neglected by either of the gentlemen, for Bellamy was 
scarce more eager to engage the attention of Eugenia, than the Major to force 
that of Camilla. By Lionel he had been informed she was heiress of Cleves; he 
deemed, therefore, the opportunity by no means to be thrown away, of making, 
what he believed required opportunity alone, a conquest of her young heart. 
Accustomed to think compliments always welcome to the fair, he construed her 
sadness into softness, and imputed her silence to the confusing impression made 
upon an inexperienced rural beauty, by the first assiduities of a man of figure 
and gallantry.

In about a quarter of an hour the servant of Mrs. Arlbery slowly returned, and, 
with some hesitation, said his lady was not at home. The gentlemen looked 
provoked, and Camilla and Eugenia, much disconcerted at so evident a denial, 
left their names, and returned to their carriage.

The journey back to Cleves was mute and dejected: Camilla was shocked at the 
conscious state of her own mind, and Eugenia was equally pensive. She began to 
think with anxiety of a contract with a person wholly unknown, and to consider 
the passion and constancy of Bellamy as the emanations of a truly elevated 
mind, and meriting her most serious gratitude.

At the hall door they were eagerly met by Sir Hugh, who, with infinite 
surprise, enquired where they had left Dr. Orkborne.

'Dr. Orkborne?' they repeated, 'we have not even seen him.'

'Not seen him? did not he come to fetch you?'

'No, Sir.'

'Why, he went to Mrs. Arlbery's on purpose! And what he stays for at that 
lady's, now you are both come away, is a thing I can't pretend to judge of; 
unless he has stopt to read one of those books he took with him; which is what 
I dare say is the case.'

'He cannot be at Mrs. Arlbery's, Sir,' said Eugenia, 'for we have but this 
moment left her house.'

'He must be there, my dear girls, for he's no where else. I saw him set out 
myself, which, however, I shan't mention the particulars of, having sent for my 
brother, whom I expect every minute.'

They then concluded he had gone by another road, as there were two ways to the 
Grove.

Edgar did not return to Cleves till the family were assembling to dinner. His 
visit to Mrs. Needham had occasioned him a new disturbance. She had rallied him 
upon the general rumour of his approaching marriage; and his confusion, from 
believing his partiality for Camilla detected, was construed into a 
confirmation of the report concerning Indiana. His disavowal was rather serious 
than strong, and involuntarily mixt with such warm eulogiums of the object he 
imagined to be meant, that Mrs. Needham, who had only named a certain fair one 
at Cleves, laughed at his denial, and thought the engagement undoubted.

With respect to his enquiries relative to Mrs. Arlbery, Mrs. Needham said, that 
she was a woman far more agreeable to the men, than to her own sex; that she 
was full of caprice, coquetry, and singularity; yet, though she abused the 
gift, she possessed an excellent and uncommon understanding. She was guilty of 
no vices, but utterly careless of appearances, and though her character was 
wholly unimpeached, she had offended or frightened almost all the county 
around, by a wilful strangeness of behaviour, resulting from an undaunted 
determination to follow in every thing the bent of her own humour.

Edgar justly deemed this a dangerous acquaintance for Camilla, whose natural 
thoughtlessness and vivacity made him dread the least imprudence in the 
connexions she might form; yet, as the reputation of Mrs. Arlbery was 
unsullied, he felt how difficult would be the task of demonstrating the perils 
he feared.

Sir Hugh, during the dinner, was exceedingly disturbed. 'What Dr. Orkborne can 
be doing with himself,' said he, 'is more than any man can tell, for he 
certainly would not stay at the lady's, when he found you were both come away; 
so that I begin to think it's ten to one but he's gone nobody knows where! for 
why else should he take all those books? which is a thing I have been thinking 
of ever since; especially as he owned himself he should never read one half of 
them. If he has taken something amiss, I am very ready to ask his pardon; 
though what it can be I don't pretend to guess.'

Miss Margland said, he was so often doing something or other that was ill-bred, 
that she was not at all surprised he should stay out at dinner time. He had 
never yet fetched her a chair, nor opened the door for her, since he came to 
the house; so that she did not know what was too bad to expect.

As they were rising from the table, a note arrived from Mr. Tyrold, with an 
excuse, that important business would prevent his coming to Cleves till the 
next day. Camilla then begged permission to go in the chaise that was to fetch 
him, flattering herself something might occur to detain her, when at 
Etherington. Sir Hugh readily assented, and composing himself for his afternoon 
nap, desired to be awaked if Dr. Orkborne came back.

All now left the room except Camilla, who, taking up a book, stood still at a 
window, till she was aroused by the voice of Edgar, who, from the Park, asked 
her what she was reading.

She turned over the leaves, ashamed at the question, to look for the title; she 
had held the book mechanically, and knew not what it was.

He then produced the promised nosegay, which had been brought by his gardener 
during her excursion. She softly lifted up the sash, pointing to her sleeping 
uncle; he gave it her with a silent little bow, and walked away; much 
disappointed to miss an opportunity from which he had hoped for some 
explanation.

She held it in her hand some time, scarcely sensible she had taken it, till, 
presently, she saw its buds bedewed with her falling tears.

She shook them off, and pressed the nosegay to her bosom. 'This, at least,' she 
cried, 'I may accept, for it was offered me before that barbarous attack. Ah! 
they know not the innocence of my regard, or they would not so wrong it! The 
universe could not tempt me to injure my cousin, though it is true, I have 
valued the kindness of Edgar—and I must always value it!—These flowers are 
more precious to me, coming from his hands, and reared in his grounds, than all 
the gems of the East could be from any other possessor. But where is the guilt 
of such a preference? And who that knows him could help feeling it?'

Sir Hugh now awakening from a short slumber, exclaimed—'I have just found out 
the reason why this poor gentleman has made off; I mean, provided he is really 
gone away, which, however, I hope not: but I think, by his bringing down all 
those books, he meant to give me a broad hint, that he had got no proper 
book-case to keep them in; which the maids as good as think too.'

Then, calling upon Camilla, he asked if she was not of that opinion.

'Y—e—s, Sir,' she hesitatingly answered.

'Well, then, my dear, if we all think the same, I'll give orders immediately 
for getting the better of that fault.'

Miss Margland, curious to know how Camilla was detained, now re-entered the 
room. Struck with the fond and melancholy air with which she was bending over 
her nosegay, she abruptly demanded—'Pray, where might you get those flowers?'

Covered with shame, she could make no answer.

'O, Miss Camilla! Miss Camilla!—ought not those flowers to belong to Miss 
Lynmere?'

'Mr. Mandlebert had promised me them yesterday morning,' answered she, in a 
voice scarce audible.

'And is this fair, Ma'am?—can you reckon it honourable?—I'll be judged by 
Sir Hugh himself. Do you think it right, Sir, that Miss Camilla should accept 
nosegays every day from Mr. Mandlebert, when her cousin has had never a one at 
all?'

'Why, it's not her fault, you know, Miss Margland, if young Mr. Mandlebert 
chuses to give them to her. However, if that vexes Indiana, I'm sure my niece 
will make them over to her with the greatest pleasure; for I never knew the 
thing she would not part with, much more a mere little smell at the nose, 
which, whether one has it or not, can't much matter after it's over.'

Miss Margland now exultingly held out her hand: the decision was obliged to be 
prompt; Camilla delivered up the flowers, and ran into her own room.

The sacrifice, cried she, is now complete! Edgar will conclude I hate him, and 
believe Indiana loves him!—no matter!—it is fitting he should think both. I 
will be steady this last evening, and to-morrow I will quit this fatal roof!
