
A Maternal Eye

The vivacity with which Camilla quitted Cleves, was sunk before she reached 
Etherington. She had quitted also Edgar, quitted him offended, and in doubt if 
it might ever be right she should vindicate herself in his opinion. Yet all 
seemed strange and unintelligible that regarded the asserted nuptials: his 
indifference was palpable; she believed him to have been unaccountably drawn 
in, and her heart softly whispered, it was herself he preferred.

From this soothing but dangerous idea, she struggled to turn her thoughts. She 
anticipated the remorse of holding the affections of the husband of her cousin, 
and determined to use every possible method to forget him—unless, which she 
strove vainly not to hope, the reported alliance should never take place.

These reflections so completely engrossed her the whole way, that she arrived 
at the Parsonage House, without the smallest mental preparation how to account 
for her return, or how to plead for remaining at Etherington. Foresight, the 
offspring of Judgment, or the disciple of Experience, made no part of the 
character of Camilla, whose impetuous disposition was open to every danger of 
indiscretion, though her genuine love of virtue glowed warm with juvenile 
ardour.

She entered, therefore, the breakfast parlour in a state of sudden perplexity 
what to say; Mr. Tyrold was alone and writing. He looked surprized, but 
embraced her with his accustomed affection, and enquired to what he owed her 
present sight.

She made no answer; but embraced him again, and enquired after her mother.

'She is well,' he replied: 'but, tell me, is your uncle impatient of my delay? 
It has been wholly unavoidable. I have been deeply engaged; and deeply 
chagrined. Your poor mother would be still more disturbed, if the nobleness of 
her mind did not support her.'

Camilla, extremely grieved, earnestly enquired what had happened.

He then informed her that Mrs. Tyrold, the very next morning, must abruptly 
quit them all and set out for Lisbon to her sick brother, Mr. Relvil.

'Is he so much worse?'

'No: I even hope he is better. An act of folly has brought this to bear. Do not 
now desire particulars. I will finish my letter, and then return with you for a 
few minutes to Cleves. The carriage must wait.'

'Suffer me first to ask, does Lavinia go with my mother?'

'No, she can only take old Ambrose. Lavinia must supply her place at home.'

'Ah! my dearest father, and may not I, too, stay with you and assist her?'

'If my brother will spare you, my dear child, there is nothing can so much 
contribute to wile away to me your mother's absence.'

Enchanted thus, without any explanation, to have gained her point, she 
completely revived; though when Mrs. Tyrold, whom she almost worshipped, 
entered the room, in all the hurry of preparing for her long journey, she shed 
a torrent of tears in her arms.

'This good girl,' said Mr. Tyrold, 'is herself desirous to quit the present 
gaieties of Cleves, to try to enliven my solitude till we all may meet again.'

The conscious and artless Camilla could not bear this undeserved praise. She 
quitted her mother, and returning to Mr. Tyrold, 'O my father!' she cried, 'if 
you will take me again under your beloved roof, it is for my sake—not 
your's—I beg to return!'

'She is right,' said Mrs. Tyrold; 'there is no merit in having an heart; she 
could have none, if to be with you were not her first gratification.'

'Yes, indeed, my dear mother, it would always be so, even if no other 
inducement—.' She stopt short, confused.

Mr. Tyrold, who continued writing, did not heed this little blunder; but his 
wife, whose quickness of apprehension and depth of observation, were always 
alive, even in the midst of business, cares, and other attentions, turned 
hastily to her daughter, and asked to what 'other inducement' she alluded.

Camilla, distressed, hung her head, and would have forborne making any answer.

Mrs. Tyrold, then, putting down various packets which she was sorting and 
selecting, came suddenly up to her, and taking both her hands, looked earnestly 
in her face, saying: 'My Camilla! something has disquieted you?—your 
countenance is not itself. Tell me, my dear girl, what brought you hither this 
morning? and what is it you mean by some other inducement?'

'Do not ask me now, my dearest mother,' answered she, in a faltering voice; 
'when you come back again, no doubt all will be over; and then—'

'And is that the time, Camilla, to speak to your best friends? would it not be 
more judicious to be explicit with them, while what affects you is still 
depending?'

Camilla, hiding her face on her mother's bosom, burst afresh into tears.

'Alas!' cried Mrs. Tyrold, 'what new evil is hovering? If it must invade me 
again through one of my children, tell me, at least, Camilla, it is not 
wilfully that you, too, afflict me? and afflict the best of fathers?'

Mr. Tyrold, dropping his pen, looked at them both with the most apprehensive 
anxiety.

'No, my dearest mother,' said Camilla, endeavouring to meet her eyes; 'not 
wilfully,—but something has happened—I can hardly myself tell how or 
what—but indeed Cleves, now—' she hesitated.

'How is my brother?' demanded Mr. Tyrold.

'O! all that is good and kind! and I grieve to quit him—but, indeed, Cleves, 
now—' Again she hesitated.

'Ah, my dear child!' said Mrs. Tyrold, 'I always feared that residence!—you 
are too young, too inconsiderate, too innocent, indeed, to be left so utterly 
to yourself.—Forgive me, my dear Mr. Tyrold; I do not mean to reflect upon 
your brother, but he is not you!—and with you alone, this dear inexperienced 
girl can be secure from all harm. Tell me, however, what it is—?'

Camilla, in the extremest confusion changed colour, but tried vainly to speak. 
Mr. Tyrold, suspended from all employment, waited fearfully some explanation.

'We have no time,' said Mrs. Tyrold, 'for delay;—you know I am going 
abroad,—and cannot ascertain my return; though all my heart left behind me, 
with my children and their father, will urge every acceleration in my power.'

Camilla wept again, fondly folding her arms round her mother; 'I had hoped,' 
she cried, 'that I should have come home to peace, comfort, tranquillity! to 
both of you, my dearest father and mother, and to all my unbroken happiness 
under your roof!—How little did I dream of so cruel a separation!'

'Console yourself, my Camilla, that you have not been its cause; may Heaven 
ever spare me evil in your shape at least!—you say it is nothing wilful? I 
can bear everything else.'

'We will not,' said Mr. Tyrold, 'press her; she will tell us all in her own 
way, and at her own time. Forced confidence is neither fair nor flattering. I 
will excuse her return to my brother, and she will the sooner be able to give 
her account for finding herself not hurried.'

'Calm yourself, then,' said Mrs. Tyrold, 'as your indulgent father permits, and 
I will proceed with my preparations.'

Camilla now, somewhat recovering, declared she had almost nothing to say; but 
her mother continued packing up, and her father went on with his letter.

She had now time to consider that her own fears and emotion were involving her 
in unnecessary confessions; she resolved, therefore, to repress the fulness of 
her heart, and to acknowledge only the accusation of Miss Margland. And in a 
few minutes, without waiting for further enquiry, she gathered courage to open 
upon the subject; and with as much ease and quietness as she could command, 
related, in general terms, the charge brought against her, and her consequent 
desire to quit Cleves, 'till,——till——' Here she stopt for breath. Mr. 
Tyrold instantly finished the sentence, 'till the marriage has taken place?'

She coloured, and faintly uttered, 'Yes.'

'You are right, my child,' said he, 'and you have acted with a prudence which 
does you honour. Neither the ablest reasoning, nor the most upright conduct, 
can so completely obliterate a surmise of this nature, from a suspicious mind, 
as absence. You shall remain, therefore, with me, till your cousin is settled 
in her new habitation. Do you know if the day is fixed?'

'No, sir,' she answered, while the roses fled her cheeks at a question which 
implied so firm a belief of the union.

'Do not suffer this affair to occasion you any further uneasiness,' he 
continued; 'it is the inherent and unalienable compact of Innocence with Truth, 
to hold themselves immovably superior to the calumny of false imputations. But 
I will go myself to Cleves, and set this whole matter right.'

'And will you, too, sir, have the goodness—' She was going to say, to make my 
peace with Edgar; but the fear of misinterpretation checked her, and she turned 
away.

He gently enquired what she meant; she avoided any explanation, and he resumed 
his writing.

Ah me! thought she, will the time ever come, when with openness, with 
propriety, I may clear myself of caprice to Edgar?

Less patient, because more alarmed than her husband, Mrs. Tyrold followed her 
to the window. She saw a tear in her eye, and again she took both her hands: 
'Have you, my Camilla,' she cried, 'have you told us all? Can unjust 
impertinence so greatly have disturbed you? Is there no sting belonging to this 
wound that you are covering from our sight, though it may precisely be the spot 
that calls most for some healing balm?'

Again the cheeks of Camilla received their fugitive roses. 'My dearest mother,' 
she cried, 'is not this enough?—to be accused—suspected—and to fear—'

She stammered, and would have withdrawn her hands; but Mrs. Tyrold, still 
holding them, said, 'To fear what? speak out, my best child! open to us your 
whole heart!—Where else will you find repositories so tender?'

Tears again flowed down the burning cheeks of Camilla, and dropping her eyes, 
'Ah, my mother!' she cried, 'you will think me so frivolous—you will blush so 
for your daughter—if I own—if I dare confess—'

Again she stopped, terrified at the conjectures to which this opening might 
give birth; but when further and fondly pressed by her mother, she added, 'It 
is not alone these unjust surmises,—nor even Indiana's unkind concurrence in 
them—but also—I have been afraid—I must have made a strange—a 
capricious—an ungrateful appearance in the eyes of Edgar Mandlebert.'

Here her voice dropt; but presently recovering, she rapidly continued, 'I know 
it is very immaterial—and I am sensible how foolish it may sound—but I 
shall also think of it no more now,—and therefore, as I have told the 
whole—'

She looked up, conscience struck at these last words, to see if they proved 
satisfactory; she caught, in the countenance of her mother, an expression of 
deep commiseration, which was followed by a thousand maternal caresses of 
unusual softness, though unaccompanied by any words.

Penetrated, yet distressed, she gratefully received them, but rejoiced when, at 
length, Mr. Tyrold, rising, said, 'Go, my love, upstairs to your sister; your 
mother, else, will never proceed with her business.'

She gladly ran off, and soon, by a concise narration, satisfied Lavinia, and 
then calmed her own troubled mind.

Mr. Tyrold now, though evidently much affected himself, strove to compose his 
wife. 'Alas!' cried she, 'do you not see what thus has touched me? Do you not 
perceive that our lovely girl, more just to his worth than its possessor, has 
given her whole heart to Edgar Mandlebert?'

'I perceived it through your emotion, but I had not discovered it myself. I 
grieve, now, that the probability of such an event had not struck me in time to 
have kept them apart for its prevention.'

'I grieve for nothing,' cried she, warmly, 'but the infatuated blindness of 
that self-lost young man. What a wife would Camilla have made him in every 
stage of their united career! And how unfortunately has she sympathised in my 
sentiments, that he alone seemed worthy to replace the first and best protector 
she must relinquish when she quits this house! What will he find in Indiana but 
a beautiful doll, uninterested in his feelings, unmoved by his excellencies, 
and incapable of comprehending him if he speaks either of business or 
literature!'

'Yet many wives of this description,' replied Mr. Tyrold, 'are more pleasing in 
the eyes of their husbands than women who are either better informed in 
intellect, or more alive in sensation; and it is not an uncommon idea amongst 
men, that where, both in temper and affairs, there is least participation, 
there is most repose. But this is not the case with Edgar.'

'No! he has a nobler resemblance than this portrait would allow him; a 
resemblance which made me hope from him a far higher style of choice. He 
prepares himself, however, his own ample punishment; for he has too much 
understanding not to sicken of mere personal allurements, and too much 
generosity to be flattered, or satisfied, by mere passive intellectual 
inferiority. Neither a mistress nor a slave can make him happy; a companion is 
what he requires; and for that, in a very few months, how vainly his secret 
soul may sigh, and think of our Camilla!'

They then settled, that it would be now essential to the peace of their child 
to keep her as much as possible from his sight; and determined not to send her 
back to Cleves to apologize for the new plan, but to take upon themselves that 
whole charge. 'Her nature,' said Mrs. Tyrold, 'is so gay, so prompt for 
happiness, that I have little fear but in absence she will soon cease to dwell 
upon him. Fear, indeed, I have, but it is of a deeper evil than this early 
impression; I fear for her future lot! With whom can we trust her?—She will 
not endure negligence; and those she cannot respect she will soon despise. What 
a prospect for her, then, with our present race of young men! their frivolous 
fickleness nauseates whatever they can reach; they have a weak shame of 
asserting, or even listening to what is right, and a shallow pride in 
professing what is wrong. How must this ingenuous girl forget all she has yet 
seen, heard, or felt, ere she can encounter wickedness, or even weakness, and 
disguise her abhorrence or contempt?'

'My dear Georgiana, let us never look forward to evil.'

'Will it not be doubly hard to bear, if it come upon us without preparation?'

'I think not. Terror shakes, and apprehension depresses: hope nerves as well as 
gladdens us. Remember always, I do not by hope mean presumption; I mean simply 
a cheerful trust in heaven.'

'I must always yield,' cried Mrs. Tyrold, 'to your superior wisdom, and 
reflecting piety; and if I cannot conquer my fears, at least I will neither 
court nor indulge them.'

The thanks of a grateful husband repaid this compliance. They sent for Camilla, 
to acquaint her they would make her excuses at Cleves: she gave a ready though 
melancholy consent, and the virtue of her motives drew tears from her idolizing 
mother, as she clasped her to her heart.

They then set out together, that Mr. Tyrold might arrange this business with 
Sir Hugh, of whom and of Eugenia Mrs. Tyrold was to take leave.
