
Modern Ideas of Life

Grieved at this separation, Mr. Tyrold retired to his study; and his two 
daughters went to the apartment of Lionel, to comfort him under the weight of 
his misconduct.

They found him sincerely affected and repentant; yet eager to hear that his 
mother was actually gone. Ill as he felt himself to deserve such an exertion 
for his future welfare, and poignant as were his shame and sorrow to have 
parted her from his excellent father, he thought all evil preferable to 
encountering her eye, or listening to her admonitions.

Though unaffectedly beloved, Mrs. Tyrold was deeply feared by all her children, 
Camilla alone excepted; by Lionel, from his horror of reproof; by Lavinia, from 
the timidity of her humility; and by Eugenia, from her high sense of parental 
superiority. Camilla alone escaped the contagion; for while too innocent, too 
undesigning, wilfully to excite displeasure, she was too gay and too 
light-hearted to admit apprehension without cause.

The gentle Lavinia knew not how to perform her painful task of delivering the 
message with which she was commissioned. The sight of Lionel in dejection was 
as sad as it was new to her, and she resolved, in conjunction with Camilla, to 
spare him till the next day, when his feelings might be less acute. They each 
sat down, therefore, to work, silent and compassionate; while he, ejaculating 
blessings upon his parents, and calling for just vengeance upon himself, 
stroamed up and down the room, biting his knuckles, and now and then striking 
his forehead.

This lasted about ten minutes: and then, suddenly advancing to his sisters, and 
snatching a hand of each: 'Come, girls,' he cried, 'now let's talk of other 
things.'

Too young to have developed the character of Lionel, they were again as much 
astonished as they had been the preceding day: but his defects, though not 
originally of the heart, were of a species that soon tend to harden it. They 
had their rise in a total aversion to reflection, a wish to distinguish himself 
from his retired, and, he thought, unfashionable relations, and an unfortunate 
coalition with some unprincipled young men, who, because flashy and gay, could 
lead him to whatever they proposed. Yet, when mischief or misfortune ensued 
from his wanton faults, he was always far more sorry than he thought it manly 
to own; but as his actions were without judgment, his repentance was without 
principle; and he was ready for some new enterprise the moment the difficulties 
of an old one subsided.

Camilla, who, from her affection to him, read his character through the 
innocence of her own, met his returning gaiety with a pleasure that was 
proportioned to her pain at his depression; but Lavinia saw it with discomfort, 
as the signal for executing her charge, and, with extreme reluctance, gave him 
to understand she had a command to fulfil to him from his mother.

The powers of conscience were again then instantly at work; he felt what he had 
deserved, he dreaded to hear what he had provoked; and trembling and drawing 
back, entreated her to wait one half hour before she entered upon the business.

She chearfully consented; and Camilla proposed extending the reprieve to the 
next day: but not two minutes elapsed, before Lionel protested he could not 
bear the suspense, and urged an immediate communication.

'She can have said nothing,' cried he, 'worse than I expect, or than I merit. 
Probe me then without delay. She is acting by me like an angel, and if she were 
to command me to turn anchoret, I know I ought to obey her.'

With much hesitation, Lavinia then began. 'My mother says, my dear Lionel, the 
fraud you have practised—'

'The fraud! what a horrid word! why it was a mere trick! a joke! a frolic! just 
to make an old hunks open his purse-strings for his natural heir. I am 
astonished at my mother! I really don't care if I don't hear another syllable.'

'Well, then, my dear Lionel, I will wait till you are calmer: my mother, I am 
sure did not mean to irritate, but to convince.'

'My mother,' continued he, striding about the room, 'makes no allowances. She 
has no faults herself, and for that reason she thinks nobody else should have 
any. Besides, how should she know what it is to be a young man? and to want a 
little cash, and not know how to get it?'

'But I am sure,' said Lavinia, 'if you wanted it for any proper purpose, my 
father would have denied himself everything, in order to supply you.'

'Yes, yes; but suppose I want it for a purpose that is not proper, how am I to 
get it then?'

'Why, then, my dear Lionel, surely you must be sensible you ought to go without 
it,' cried the sisters, in a breath.

'Ay, that's as you girls say, that know nothing of the matter. If a young man, 
when he goes into the world, was to make such a speech as that, he would be 
pointed at. Besides, who must he live with? You don't suppose he is to shut 
himself up, with a few musty books, sleeping over the fire, under pretence of 
study, all day long, do you? like young Melmond, who knows no more of the world 
than one of you do?'

'Indeed,' said Camilla, 'he seemed to me an amiable and modest young man, 
though very romantic.'

'O, I dare say he did! I could have laid any wager of that. He's just a girl's 
man, just the very thing, all sentiment, and poetry and heroics. But we, my 
little dear, we lads of spirit, hold all that amazing cheap. I assure you, I 
would as soon be seen trying on a lady's cap at a glass, as poring over a crazy 
old author when I could help it. I warrant you think, because one is at the 
university, one must all be book-worms?'

'Why, what else do you go there for but to study?'

'Every thing in the world, my dear.'

'But are there not sometimes young men who are scholars without being 
book-worms?' cried Camilla, half colouring; 'is not—is not Edgar 
Mandlebert—'

'O yes, yes; an odd thing of that sort happens now and then. Mandlebert has 
spirit enough to carry it off pretty well, without being ridiculous; though he 
is as deep, for his time, as e'er an old fellow of a college. But then this is 
no rule for others. You must not expect an Edgar Mandlebert at every turn.'

Ah no! thought Camilla.

'But, Edgar,' said Lavinia, 'has had an extraordinary education, as well as 
possessing extraordinary talents and goodness: and you, too, my dear Lionel, to 
fulfil what may be expected from you, should look back to your father, who was 
brought up at the same university, and is now considered as one of the first 
men it has produced. While he was respected by the learned for his application, 
he was loved even by the indolent for his candour and kindness of heart. And 
though his income, as you know, was so small, he never ran in debt, and by an 
exact but open œconomy, escaped all imputation of meanness: while by 
forbearing either to conceal, or repine at his limited fortune, he blunted even 
the raillery of the dissipated, by frankly and good humouredly meeting it half 
way. How often have I heard my dear mother tell you this!'

'Yes; but all this, child, is nothing to the purpose; my father is no more like 
other men than if he had been born in another planet, and my attempting to 
resemble him, is as great a joke, as if you were to dress up Miss Margland in 
Indiana's flowers and feathers, and then expect people to call her a beauty.'

'We do not say you resemble my father, now,' said Camilla, archly; 'but is 
there any reason why you should not try to do it by and by?'

'O yes! a little one! nature, nature, my dear, is in the way. I was born a bit 
of a buck. I have no manner of natural taste for study, and poring, and 
expounding, and black-letter work. I am a light, airy spark, at your service, 
not quite so wise as I am merry;—but let that pass. My father, you know, is 
firm as a rock. He minds neither wind nor weather, nor fleerer nor sneerer: but 
this firmness, look ye, he has kept all to himself; not a whit of it do I 
inherit; every wind that blows veers me about, and makes me look some new way.'

Soon after, gathering courage from curiosity, he desired to hear the message at 
once.

Lavinia, unwillingly complying, then repeated: 'The fraud which you have 
practised, my mother says, whether from wanton folly to give pain, or from 
rapacious discontent to gain money, she will leave without comment, satisfied 
that if you have any heart at all, its effects must bring its remorse, since it 
has dangerously encreased the infirmities of your uncle, driven him to a 
foreign land, and forced your mother to forsake her home and family in his 
pursuit, unless she were willing to see you punished by the entire 
disinheritance with which you are threatened. But——'

'O, no more! no more! I am ready to shoot myself already! My dear, excellent 
mother! what do I not owe you! I had never seen, never thought of the business 
in this solemn way before. I meant nothing at first but a silly joke, and all 
this mischief has followed unaccountably. I assure you, I had no notion at the 
beginning he would have minded the letter; and afterwards, Jack Whiston 
persuaded me, the money was as good as my own, and that it was nothing but a 
little cribbing from myself. I will never trust him again; I see the whole now 
in its true and atrocious colours.—I will devote myself in future to make all 
the amends in my power to my dear incomparable mother.'

The sisters affectionately encouraged this idea, which produced near a quarter 
of an hour's serious thinking and penitence.

He then begged to hear the rest; and Lavinia continued.

'But since you are re-admitted, said my mother, to Etherington, by the clemency 
of your forbearing father, she charges you to remember, you can only repay his 
goodness by an application the most intense to those studies you have hitherto 
neglected, and of which your neglect has been the cause of all your errors; by 
committing to idle amusements the time that innocently, as well as profitably, 
ought to have been dedicated to the attainment of knowledge. She charges you 
also to ask yourself, since, during the vacation, your father himself is your 
tutor, upon what pretext you can justify wasting his valuable time, however 
little you may respect your own?—Finally—'

'I never wasted his time! I never desired to have any instruction in the 
vacations. 'Tis the most deuced thing in life to be studying so hard 
incessantly. The waste of time is all his own affair;—his own choice—not 
mine, I assure you! Go on, however.'

'Finally, she adjures you to consider, that if you still persevere to consume 
your time in wilful negligence, to bury all thought in idle gaiety, and to act 
without either reflection or principle, the career of faults which begins but 
in unthinking folly, will terminate in shame, in guilt, and in ruin! And though 
such a declension of all good, must involve your family in your affliction, 
your disgrace, she bids me say, will ultimately fall but where it ought; since 
your own want of personal sensibility to the horror of your conduct, will 
neither harden nor blind any human being besides yourself. This is all.'

'And enough too,' cried he, reddening: 'I am a very wretch!—I believe 
that—though I am sure I can't tell how; for I never intend any harm, never 
think, never dream of hurting any mortal! But as to study—I must own to you, 
I hate it most deucedly. Anything else—if my mother had but exacted any thing 
else—with what joy I would have shewn my obedience!—If she had ordered me 
to be horse-ponded, I do protest to you, I would not have demurred.'

'How always you run into the ridiculous!' cried Camilla.

'I was never so serious in my life; not that I should like to be horse-ponded 
in the least, though I would submit to it for a punishment, and out of duty: 
but then, when it was done, it would be over: now the deuce of study is, there 
is no end of it! And it does so little for one! one can go through life so well 
without it! There is not above here and there an old codger that asks one a 
question that can bring it into any play. And then, a turn upon one's heel, or 
looking at one's watch, or wondering at one's short memory, or happening to 
forget just that one single passage, carries off the whole in two minutes, as 
completely as if one had been working one's whole life to get ready for the 
assault. And pray, now, tell me, how can it be worth one's best days, one's 
gayest hours, the very flower of one's life—all to be sacrificed to plodding 
over musty grammars and lexicons, merely to cut a figure just for about two 
minutes once or twice in a year?'

The sisters, brought up with an early reverence for learning, as forming a 
distinguished part of the accomplishments of their father, could not subscribe 
to this argument. But they laughed; and that was ever sufficient for Lionel, 
who, though sincerely, in private, he loved and honoured his father, never 
bestowed upon him one voluntary moment that frolic or folly invited elsewhere.

Lavinia and Camilla, perfectly relieved now from all fears for their brother, 
repaired to the study of their father, anxious to endeavour to chear him, and 
to accelerate a meeting and reconciliation for Lionel; but they found him 
desirous to be alone, though kindly, and unsolicited, he promised to admit his 
son before dinner.

Lionel heard this with a just awe; but gave it no time for deep impression. It 
was still very early, and he could settle himself to nothing during the hours 
yet to pass before the interview. He persuaded his sisters, therefore, to walk 
out with him, to while away at once expectation and retrospection.
