
Modern Notions of Penitence

They set out with no other plan than to take a three hours' stroll. Lionel led 
the way, and they journeyed through various pleasant lanes and meadows, till, 
about three miles distance from Etherington, upon ascending a beautiful little 
hill, they espied, fifty yards off, the Grove, and a party of company 
sauntering round its grounds.

He immediately proposed making a visit to Mrs. Arlbery; but Lavinia declined 
presenting herself to a lady who was unknown to her mother; and Camilla, 
impressed with the promise she had intended for Edgar, which she was sure, 
though unpronounced, he had comprehended, dissented also from the motion.

He then said he would go alone; for his spirits were so low from vexation and 
regret, that they wanted recruit; and he would return to them by the time they 
would be sufficiently rested to walk home.

To this they agreed; and amused themselves with watching to see him join the 
group; in which, however, they were no sooner gratified, than, to their great 
confusion, they perceived that he pointed them out, and that all eyes were 
immediately directed towards the hill.

Vexed and astonished at his quick passing penitence, they hastened down the 
declivity, and ran on till a lane, with an high hedge on each side, sheltered 
them from view.

But Lionel, soon pursuing them, said he brought the indisputable orders of his 
invincible widow to convoy them to the mansion. She never, she had owned, 
admitted formal visitors, but whatever was abrupt and out of the way, won her 
heart.

To the prudent Lavinia, this invitation was by no means alluring. Mrs. Tyrold, 
from keeping no carriage, visited but little, and the Grove was not included in 
her small circle; Lavinia, therefore, though she knew not how to be peremptory, 
was steady in refusal; and Camilla, who would naturally with pleasure have 
yielded, had a stronger motive for firmness, than any with which she was gifted 
by discretion, in her wish to oblige Mandlebert. But Lionel would listen to 
neither of them; and when he found his insistance insufficient, seized Lavinia 
by one arm, and Camilla by the other, and dragged them up the hill, in defiance 
of their entreaties, and in full view of the party. He then left the more 
pleading, though less resisting, Lavinia alone; but pulled Camilla down by the 
opposite side, with a velocity that, though meant but to bring her to the verge 
of a small rivulet, forced her into the midst of it so rapidly that he could 
not himself at last stop: and wetted her so completely, that she could with 
difficulty, when she got across it, walk on.

The violent spirits of Lionel always carried him beyond his own intentions; he 
was now really sorry for what he had done: and Lavinia, who had quietly 
followed, was uneasy from the fear of some ill consequence to her sister.

Mrs. Arlbery, who had seen the transaction, came forth now herself, to invite 
them all into her house, and offer a fire and dry clothing to Camilla; not 
sparing, however, her well-merited raillery at the awkward exploit of young 
Tyrold.

Camilla, ashamed to be thus seen, would have hidden herself behind her sister, 
and retreated; but even Lavinia now, fearing for her health, joined in the 
request, and she was obliged to enter the house.

Mrs. Arlbery took her upstairs, to her own apartment, and supplied her 
immediately with a complete change of apparel; protesting that Lionel should be 
punished for his frolic, by a solitary walk to Etherington, to announce that 
she would keep his two sisters for the day.

Opposition was vain; she was gay, good humoured, and pleasant, but she would 
not be denied. She meant not, however, to inflict the serious penalty which the 
face of Lionel proclaimed him to be suffering, when he prepared to depart; and 
the sisters, who read in it his dread of meeting Mr. Tyrold alone, in the 
present circumstances of his affairs, conferred together, and agreed that 
Lavinia should accompany him, both to intercede for returning favour from his 
father, and to explain the accident of Camilla's staying at the Grove. Mrs. 
Arlbery, meanwhile, promised to restore her young guest safe at night in her 
own carriage.

Notwithstanding the pleasure with which Camilla, in any other situation, would 
have renewed this acquaintance, was now changed into reluctance, she was far 
from insensible to the flattering kindness with which Mrs. Arlbery received and 
entertained her, nor to the frankness with which she confessed, that her 
invisibility the other morning, had resulted solely from pique that the visit 
had not been made sooner.

Camilla would have attempted some apology for the delay, but she assured her 
apologies were what she neither took nor gave; and then laughingly added—'We 
will try one another to day, and if we find it won't do—we will shake hands 
and part. That, you must know, is my mode; and is it not vastly better than 
keeping up an acquaintance that proves dull, merely because it has been begun?'

She then ordered away all her visitors, without the smallest ceremony; telling 
them, however, they might come back in the evening, only desiring they would 
not be early. Camilla stared; but they all submitted as to a thing of course.

'You are not used to my way, I perceive,' cried she, smiling; 'yet, I can 
nevertheless assure you, you can do nothing so much for your happiness as to 
adopt it. You are made a slave in a moment by the world, if you don't begin 
life by defying it. Take your own way, follow your own humour, and you and the 
world will both go on just as well, as if you ask its will and pleasure for 
everything you do, and want, and think.'

She then expressed herself delighted with Lionel, for bringing them together by 
this short cut, which abolished a world of formalities, not more customary than 
fatiguing. 'I pass, I know,' continued she, 'for a mere creature of whim; but, 
believe me, there is no small touch of philosophy in the composition of my 
vagaries. Extremes, you know, have a mighty knack of meeting. Thus I, like the 
sage, though not with sage-like motives, save time that must otherwise be 
wasted; brave rules that would murder common sense; and when I have made people 
stare, turn another way that I may laugh.'

She then, in a graver strain, and in a manner that proved the laws of 
politeness all her own, where she chose, for any particular purpose, or 
inclination, to exert them, hoped this profession of her faith would plead her 
excuse, that she had thus incongruously made her fair guest a second time enter 
her house, before her first visit was acknowledged; and enquired whether it 
were to be returned to Etherington or at Cleves.

Camilla answered, she was now at home, on account of her mother's being obliged 
to make a voyage to Lisbon.

Mrs. Arlbery said, she would certainly, then, wait upon her at Etherington; and 
very civilly regretted having no acquaintance with Mrs. Tyrold; archly, 
however, adding: 'As we have no where met, I could not seek her at her own 
house without running too great a risk; for then, whether I had liked her or 
not, I must have received her, you know, into mine. So, you see, I am not quite 
without prudence, whatever the dear world says to the contrary.'

She then spoke of the ball, public breakfast, and raffle; chatting both upon 
persons and things with an easy gaiety, and sprightly negligence, extremely 
amusing to Camilla, and which soon, in despite of the unwillingness with which 
she had entered her house, brought back her original propensity to make the 
acquaintance, and left no regret for what Lionel had done, except what rested 
upon the repugnance of Edgar to his intercourse. As he could not, however, 
reproach what was begun without her concurrence, he would see, she hoped, like 
herself, that common civility henceforward would exact its continuance.

In proportion as her pleasure from this accidental commerce was awakened, and 
her early partiality revived, her own spirits re-animated, and, in the course 
of the many hours they now spent completely together, she was set so entirely 
at her ease, by the good humour of Mrs. Arlbery, that she lost all fear of her 
wit. She found it rather playful than satirical; rather seeking to amuse than 
to disconcert; and though sometimes, from the resistless pleasure of uttering a 
bon mot she thought more of its brilliancy than of the pain it might inflict, 
this happened but rarely, and was more commonly succeeded by regret than by 
triumph.

Camilla soon observed she had, personally, nothing to apprehend, peculiar 
partiality supplying the place of general delicacy, in shielding her from every 
shaft that even pleasantry could render poignant. The embarrassment, therefore, 
which, in ingenuous youth, checks the attempt to please, by fear of failure, or 
shame of exertion, gave way to natural spirits, which gaily rising from 
entertainment received, restored her vivacity, and gradually, though 
unconsciously, enabled her to do justice to her own abilities, by unaffectedly 
calling forth the mingled sweetness and intelligence of her character; and Mrs. 
Arlbery, charmed with all she observed, and flattered by all she inspired, felt 
such satisfaction in her evident conquest, that before the tête-à-tête was 
closed, their admiration was become nearly mutual.

When the evening party was announced, they both heard with surprise that the 
day was so far advanced. 'They can wait, however,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'for I 
know they have nothing to do.'

She then invited Camilla to return to her the next day for a week.

Camilla felt well disposed to comply, hoping soon to reason from Edgar his 
prejudice against a connection that afforded her such singular pleasure; but to 
leave her father at this period was far from every wish. She excused herself, 
therefore, saying, she had still six weeks due to her uncle at Cleves, before 
any other engagement could take place.

'Well, then, when you quit your home for Sir Hugh, will you beg off a few days 
from him, and set them down to my account?'

'If my uncle pleases—'

'If he pleases?' repeated she, laughing; 'pray never give that If into his 
decision; you only put contradiction into people's heads, by asking what 
pleases them. Say at once, My good uncle, Mrs. Arlbery has invited me to 
indulge her with a few days at the Grove; so to-morrow I shall go to her. Will 
you promise me this?'

'Dear madam, no! my uncle would think me mad.'

'And suppose he should! A little alarm now and then keeps life from stagnation. 
They call me mad, I know, sometimes; wild, flighty, and what not; yet you see 
how harmless I am, though I afford food for such notable commentary.'

'But can you really like such things should be said of you?'

'I adore the frankness of that question! why, n—o,—I rather think I don't. 
But I'm not sure. However, to prevent their minding me, I must mind them. And 
it's vastly more irksome to give up one's own way, than to hear a few 
impertinent remarks. And as to the world, depend upon it, my dear Miss Tyrold, 
the more you see of it, the less you will care for it.'

She then said she would leave her to re-invest herself in her own attire, and 
go downstairs, to see what the poor simple souls, who had had no more wit than 
to come back thus at her call, had found to do with themselves.

Camilla, having only her common morning dress, and even that utterly spoilt, 
begged that her appearance might be dispensed with; but Mrs. Arlbery, 
exclaiming, 'Why, there are only men; you don't mind men, I hope!' ashamed, she 
promised to get ready; yet she had not sufficient courage to descend, till her 
gay hostess came back, and accompanied her to the drawing room.
