
Strictures on Beauty

To lengthen the airing, Mr. Tyrold ordered the carriage by a new road; and to 
induce Eugenia to break yet another spell, in walking as well as riding, he 
proposed their alighting, when they came to a lane, and leaving the coach in 
waiting while they took a short stroll.

He walked between his daughters a considerable way, passing, wherever it was 
possible, close to cottages, labourers, and children. Eugenia submitted with a 
sigh, but held down her head, affrighted at every fresh object they 
encountered, till, upon approaching a small miserable hut, at the door of which 
several children were playing, an unlucky boy called out, 'O come! come! 
look!—here's the little hump-back gentlewoman!'

She then, clinging to her father, could not stir another step, and cast upon 
him a look of appeal and reproach that almost overset him; but, after speaking 
to her some words of kindness, he urged her to go on, and alone, saying, 'Throw 
only a shilling to the senseless little crew, and let Camilla follow and give 
nothing, and see which will become the most popular.'

They both obeyed, Eugenia fearfully and with quickness casting amongst them 
some silver, and Camilla quietly walking on.

'O, I have got a sixpence!' cried one; 'and I've got a shilling!' said another; 
while the mother of the little tribe came from her wash-tub, and called out, 
'God bless your ladyship!' and the father quitted a little garden at the side 
of his cottage, to bow down to the ground, and cry, 'Heaven reward you, good 
madam! you'll have a blessing go with you, go where you will!'

The children then, dancing up to Camilla, begged her charity; but when, 
seconding the palpable intention of her father, she said she had nothing for 
them, they looked highly dissatisfied, while they redoubled their blessings to 
Eugenia.

'See, my child,' said Mr. Tyrold, now joining them, 'how cheaply preference, 
and even flattery, may be purchased!'

'Ah, Sir!' she answered, recovered from her terrour, yet deep in reflection, 
'this is only by bribery, and gross bribery, too! And what pleasure, or what 
confidence can accrue from preference so earned!'

'The means, my dear Eugenia, are not beneath the objects: if it is only from 
those who unite native hardness with uncultured minds and manners, that 
civility is to be obtained by such sordid materials, remember, also, it is from 
such only it can ever fail you. In the lowest life, equally with the highest, 
wherever nature has been kind, sympathy springs spontaneously for whatever is 
unfortunate, and respect for whatever seems innocent. Steel yourself, then, 
firmly to withstand attacks from the cruel and unfeeling, and rest perfectly 
secure you will have none other to apprehend.'

The clear and excellent capacity of Eugenia, comprehended in this lesson, and 
its illustration, all the satisfaction Mr. Tyrold hoped to impart; and she was 
ruminating upon it with abated despondence, when, as they came to a small 
house, surrounded with a high wall, Mr. Tyrold, looking through an iron gate at 
a female figure who stood at one of the windows, exclaimed—'What a beautiful 
creature! I have rarely, I think seen a more perfect face.'

Eugenia felt so much hurt by this untimely sight, that, after a single glance, 
which confirmed the truth of what he said, she bent her eyes another way; while 
Camilla herself was astonished that her kind father should call their attention 
to beauty, at so sore and critical a juncture.

'The examination of a fine picture,' said he, fixing his eyes upon the window, 
and standing still at the iron gate, 'is a constant as well as exquisite 
pleasure; for we look at it with an internal security, that such as it appears 
to us to-day, it will appear again tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow; but in 
the pleasure given by the examination of a fine face, there is always, to a 
contemplative mind, some little mixture of pain; an idea of its fragility 
steals upon our admiration, and blends with it something like solicitude; the 
consciousness how short a time we can view it perfect, how quickly its 
brilliancy of bloom will be blown, and how ultimately it will be nothing.—'

'You would have me, Sir,' said Eugenia, now raising her eyes, 'learn to see 
beauty with unconcern, by depreciating its value? I feel your kind intention; 
but it does not come home to me; reasoning such as this may be equally 
applicable to any thing else, and degrade whatever is desirable into 
insignificance.'

'No, my dear child, there is nothing, either in its possession or its loss, 
that can be compared with beauty; nothing so evanescent, and nothing that 
leaves behind it a contrast which impresses such regret. It cannot be 
forgotten, since the same features still remain, though they are robbed of 
their effect upon the beholder; the same complexion is there, though faded into 
a tint bearing no resemblance with its original state; and the same eyes 
present themselves to the view, though bereft of all the lustre that had 
rendered them captivating.'

'Ah, Sir! this is an argument but formed for the moment. Is not the loss of 
youth the same to every body? and is not age equally unwelcome to the ugly and 
to the handsome?'

'For activity, for strength, and for purposes of use, certainly, my dear girl, 
there can be no difference; but for motives to mental regret, there can be no 
comparison. To those who are commonly moulded, the gradual growth of decay 
brings with it its gradual endurance, because little is missed from day to day; 
hope is not roughly chilled, nor expectation rudely blasted; they see their 
friends, their connections, their contemporaries, declining by the same laws, 
and they yield to the immutable and general lot rather imperceptibly than 
resignedly; but it is not so with the beauty; her loss is not only general, but 
peculiar; and it is the peculiar, not the general evil, that constitutes all 
hardship. Health, strength, agility, and animal spirits, she may sorrowing feel 
diminish; but she hears everyone complain of similar failures, and she misses 
them unmurmuring, though not unlamenting; but of beauty, every declension is 
marked with something painful to self-love. The change manifested by the mirror 
might patiently be borne; but the change manifested in the eyes of every 
beholder, gives a shock that does violence to every pristine feeling.'

'This may certainly, sir, be cruel; trying at least; but then,—what a youth 
has she first passed! Mortification comes upon her, at least, in succession; 
she does not begin the world with it,—a stranger at all periods to anything 
happier!'

'Ah, my child! the happiness caused by personal attractions pays a dear 
after-price! The soldier who enters the field of battle requires not more 
courage, though of a different nature, than the faded beauty who enters an 
assembly-room. To be wholly disregarded, after engaging every eye; to be 
unassisted, after being habituated to seeing crowds anxiously offer their 
services; to be unheard, after monopolising every ear—can you, indeed, 
persuade yourself a change such as this demands but ordinary firmness? Yet the 
altered female who calls for it, has the least chance to obtain it; for even 
where nature has endowed her with fortitude, the world and its flatteries have 
almost uniformly enervated it, before the season of its exertion.'

'All this may be true,' said Eugenia, with a sigh; 'and to me, however sad in 
itself, it may prove consolatory; and yet—forgive my sincerity, when I 
own—I would purchase a better appearance at any price, any expence, any 
payment, the world could impose!'

Mr. Tyrold was preparing an answer, when the door of the house, which he had 
still continued facing, was opened, and the beautiful figure, which had for 
some time retired from the window, rushed suddenly upon a lawn before the gate 
against which they were leaning.

Not seeing them, she sat down upon the grass, which she plucked up by hands 
full, and strewed over her fine flowing hair.

Camilla, fearing they should seem impertinent, would have retreated; but 
Eugenia, much struck, sadly, yet with earnestness, compelled herself to regard 
the object before her, who was young, fair, of a tall and striking figure, with 
features delicately regular.

A sigh, not to be checked, acknowledged how little either reasoning or 
eloquence could subdue a wish to resemble such an appearance, when the young 
person, flinging herself suddenly upon her face, threw her white arms over her 
head, and sobbed aloud with violence.

Astonished, and deeply concerned, Eugenia internally said, alas! what a world 
is this! even beauty so exquisite, without waiting for age or change, may be 
thus miserable!

She feared to speak, lest she should be heard; but she looked up to her father, 
with an eye that spoke concession, and with an interest for the fair afflicted, 
which seemed to request his assistance.

He motioned to her to be quiet; when the young person, abruptly half rising, 
burst into a fit of loud, shrill, and discordant laughter.

Eugenia now, utterly confounded, would have drawn her father away; but he was 
intently engaged in his observations, and steadily kept his place.

In two minutes, the laugh ceased all at once, and the young creature, hastily 
rising, began turning round with a velocity that no machine could have exceeded.

The sisters now fearfully interchanged looks that shewed they thought her mad, 
and both endeavoured to draw Mr. Tyrold from the gate, but in vain; he made 
them hold by his arms, and stood still.

Without seeming giddy, she next began to jump; and he now could only detain his 
daughters, by shewing them the gate, at which they stood, was locked.

In another minute, she perceived them, and, coming eagerly forward, dropt 
several low courtesies, saying, at every fresh bend—'Good day!—Good 
day!—Good day!'

Equally trembling, they now both turned pale with fear; but Mr. Tyrold, who was 
still immovable, answered her by a bow, and asked if she were well.

'Give me a shilling!' was her reply, while the slaver drivelled unrestrained 
from her mouth, rendering utterly disgusting a chin that a statuary might have 
wished to model.

'Do you live at this house!' said Mr. Tyrold.

'Yes, please—yes, please—yes, please,' she answered, twenty times 
following, and almost black in the face before she would allow herself to take 
another breath.

A cat now appearing at the door, she seized it, and tried to twine it round her 
neck with great fondling, wholly unresisting the scratches which tore her fine 
skin.

Next, capering forward with it towards the gate, 'Look! look!' she cried, 
'here's puss!—here's puss!—here's puss!'

Then, letting it fall, she tore her handkerchief off her neck, put it over her 
face, strained it as tight as she was able, and tied it under her chin; and 
then struck her head with both her hands, making a noise that resembled nothing 
human.

'Take, take me away, my father!' cried Eugenia, 'I see, I feel your awful 
lesson! but impress it no further, lest I die in receiving it!'

Mr. Tyrold immediately moved off without speaking; Camilla, penetrated for her 
sister, observed the same silence; and Eugenia, hanging upon her father, and 
absorbed in profound rumination, only by the depth of her sighs made her 
existence known; and thus, without the interchange of a word, slowly and 
pensively they walked back to the carriage.

Eugenia broke the silence as soon as they were seated: 'O, my father!' she 
exclaimed, 'what a sight have you made me witness! how dread a reproof have you 
given to my repining spirit! Did you know this unhappy beauty was at that 
house? Did you lead me thither purposely to display to me her shocking 
imbecility?'

'Relying upon the excellence of your understanding, I ventured upon an 
experiment more powerful, I well knew, than all that reason could urge; an 
experiment not only striking at the moment, but which, by playing upon the 
imagination, as well as convincing the judgment, must make an impression that 
can never be effaced. I have been informed for some time, that this poor girl 
was in our neighbourhood; she was born an idiot, and therefore, having never 
known brighter days, is insensible to her terrible state. Her friends are 
opulent, and that house is taken, and a woman is paid, to keep her in existence 
and in obscurity. I had heard of her uncommon beauty, and when the news reached 
me of my dear Eugenia's distress, the idea of this meeting occurred to me; I 
rode to the house, and engaged the woman to detain her unfortunate charge at 
the window till we appeared, and then to let her loose into the garden. Poor, 
ill fated young creature! it has been, indeed, a melancholy sight.'

'A sight,' cried Eugenia, 'to come home to me with shame!—O, my dear Father! 
your prescription strikes to the root of my disease!—shall I ever again dare 
murmur!—will any egotism ever again make me believe no lot so hapless as my 
own! I will think of her when I am discontented; I will call to my mind this 
spectacle of human degradation—and submit, at least with calmness, to my 
lighter evils and milder fate.'

'My excellent child! this is just what I expected from the candour of your 
temper, and the rectitude of your sentiments. You have seen, here, the value of 
intellects in viewing the horrour of their loss; and you have witnessed, that 
beauty, without mind, is more dreadful than any deformity. You have seized my 
application, and left me nothing to enforce; my dear, my excellent child! you 
have left for your fond Father nothing but tender approbation! With the utmost 
thankfulness to Providence, I have marked from your earliest childhood, the 
native justness of your understanding; which, with your studious inclination to 
sedentary accomplishments, has proved a reviving source of consolation to your 
mother and to me, for the cruel accidents we have incessantly lamented. How 
will that admirable mother rejoice in the recital I have to make to her! What 
pride will she take in a daughter so worthily her own, so resembling her in 
nobleness of nature, and a superior way of thinking! Her tears, my child, like 
mine, will thank you for your exertions! she will strain you to her fond bosom, 
as your father strains you at this moment!'

'Yes, Sir,' cried Eugenia, 'your kind task is now completed with your 
vanquished Eugenia! her thoughts, her occupations, her happiness, shall 
henceforth all be centred in filial gratitude and contentment.'

The affectionate Camilla, throwing her arms about them both, bathed each with 
the tears of joy and admiration, which this soothing conclusion to an adventure 
so severe excited.
