
The disastrous Buskins

Camilla, though her personal sorrows were blunted by the view of the calamities 
and resignation of her sister, was so little disposed for amusement, that she 
had accepted the invitation of Mrs. Arlbery, only from wanting spirit to resist 
its urgency. Mr. Tyrold was well pleased that such a recreation came in her 
way, but desired Lavinia might be of the party: not only that she might partake 
of the same pleasure, but from a greater security in her prudence, than in that 
of her naturally thoughtless sister.

The town of Etherington afforded no theatre; and the room fitted up for the 
night's performance could contain but two boxes, one of which was secured for 
Mrs. Arlbery and her friends.

The attentive Major was ready to offer his hand to Camilla upon her arrival. 
The rest of the officers were in the box.

The play was Othello; and so miserably represented, that Lavinia would 
willingly have retired after the first scene: but the native spirits of Camilla 
revisited her in the view of the ludicrous personages of the drama. And they 
were soon joined by Sir Sedley Clarendel, whose quaint conceits and remarks 
assisted the risibility of the scene. She thought him the least comprehensible 
person she had ever known; but as he was totally indifferent to her, his oddity 
entertained without tormenting her.

The actors were of the lowest strolling kind, and so utterly without merit, 
that they had never yet met with sufficient encouragement to remain one week in 
the same place. They had only a single scene for the whole performance, which 
depictured a camp, and which here served for a street, a senate, a city, a 
castle, and a bed-chamber.

The dresses were almost equally parsimonious, everyone being obliged to take 
what would fit him, from a wardrobe that did not allow quite two dresses a 
person for all the plays they had to enact. Othello, therefore, was equipped as 
king Richard the third, save that instead of a regal front he had a black wig, 
to imitate wool: while his face had been begrimed with a smoked cork.

Iago wore a suit of cloaths originally made for Lord Foppington: Brabantio had 
borrowed the armour of Hamlet's Ghost: Cassio, the Lieutenant General in the 
christian army, had only been able to equip himself in Osmyn's Turkish vest; 
and Roderigo, accoutred in the garment of Shylock, came forth a complete Jew.

Desdemona, attired more suitably to her fate than to her expectations, went 
through the whole of her part, except the last scene, in the sable weeds of 
Isabella. And Amelia was fain to content herself with the habit of the first 
witch in Macbeth.

The gestures, both of the gentlemen and ladies, were as outrageous as if meant 
rather to intimidate the audience, than to shew their own animation; and the 
men approached each other so closely with arms a-kimbo, or double fists, that 
Sir Sedley, with pretended alarm, said they were giving challenges for a boxing 
match.

The ladies also, in the energy of their desire not to be eclipsed, took so much 
exercise in their action, that they tore out the sleeves of their gowns; which, 
though pinned up every time they left the stage, completely exposed their 
shoulders at the end of every act; and they raised their arms so high while 
facing each other, that Sir Sedley expressed frequent fears they meant to 
finish by pulling caps.

So imperfect were they also in their parts, that the prompter was the only 
person from whom any single speech passed without a blunder.

Iago, who was the master of the troop, was the sole performer who spoke not 
with a provincial dialect; the rest all betrayed their birth and parentage the 
first line they uttered.

Cassio proclaimed himself from Norfolk:

The Deuk dew greet yew, General,
—— —— —— —— —— ——
Being not at yew're lodging to be feund—— ——
The senate sent above tree several quests, &c.
Othello himself proved a true Londoner; and with his famed soldier-like 
eloquence in the senate-scene, thus began his celebrated defence.

Most potent, grawe, and rewerend Seignors,
My wery noble and approwed good masters,
That I have ta'en avay this old man's darter—
I vill a round, unwarnish'd tale deliver
Of my whole course of love; vhat drugs, vhat charms,
Vhat conjuration, and vhat mighty magic
I von his darter with—— ——
Her father lov'd me, oft inwited me—— ——
—— —— ——My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a vorld of sighs,
She svore in faith 'tvas strange, 'tvas passing strange,
'Tvas pitiful, 't'vas vondrous pitiful;
She vish'd she had not heard it; yet she vish'd
That Heawen had made her such a man.—— ——
This only is the vitchcraft I have us'd;
Here comes the lady, let her vitness it.
This happily making the gentle Desdemona recognised, notwithstanding her 
appearance was so little bridal, her Somersetshire father cried:

I preay you hear 'ur zpeak.
If a confez that a waz half the woer
Deztruction on my head, if my bead bleame
Light o' the mon!
His daughter, in the Worcestershire pronunciation, answered:

Noble father,
Hi do perceive ere a divided duty;
To you hi howe my life hand heducation,
My life hand heducation both do teach me
Ow to respect you. You're the lord hof duty;
Hi'm itherto your daughter: but ere's my usband!——
The fond Othello then exclaimed:

Your woices, lords! beseech you let her vill
Have a free vay!— — —
And Brabantio took leave with

Look to'ur, Moor! if th' azt eyez to zee;
A haz deceiv'd 'ur veather, and may thee.—
They were detained so long between the first and second act, that Sir Sedley 
said he feared poor Desdemona had lost the thread-paper from which she was to 
mend her gown, and recommended to the two young ladies to have the charity to 
go and assist her. 'Consider,' he said, 'the trepidation of a fair bride but 
just entered into her shackles. Who knows but Othello may be giving her a 
strapping, in private, for wearing out her cloaths so fast! you young ladies 
think nothing of these little conjugal freedoms.'

Mrs. Arlbery, though for some time she had been as well diverted by the play as 
Camilla, less new to such exhibitions, was soon tired of the sameness of the 
blunders, and, at the end of the fourth act, proposed retiring. But Camilla, 
who had long not felt so much entertained, looked so disappointed, that her 
good humour overcame her fatigue, and she was insisting upon staying; when a 
gentleman, who visited them from the opposite box, proposed that the young 
ladies should be carried home by his mother, a lady who lived at Etherington, 
and was acquainted at the rectory, and who intended to stay out not only the 
play but the farce. Lavinia consented; the son went with the proposition, and 
the business was soon arranged. Mrs. Arlbery, who had three miles to go beyond 
the parsonage-house, and who, though she delighted to oblige, was but little in 
the habit of practising self-denial, then consigned the young ladies to General 
Kinsale, to be conducted to the opposite box, and was handed by Colonel Andover 
to her coach.

The General guarded the eldest sister; the Major took care of Camilla: but they 
were all stopt in their passage by the sudden seizure of a pickpocket, and 
forced hastily back to the box they had quitted.

This commotion, though it had disturbed all the audience, had not stopt the 
performance; and Desdemona being just now discovered in bed, Camilla, not to 
lose the interesting scene, persuaded her sister to wait till the play was 
over, before they attempted again to cross to the opposite box; into which, in 
a few minutes after, she saw Mandlebert enter.

They had both already seated themselves as much out of sight as possible; and 
Camilla now began to regret she had not accompanied Mrs. Arlbery. She had 
thought only of the play and its entertainment, till the sight of Mandlebert 
told her that her situation was improper; and the idea only occurred to her by 
considering that it would occur to him.

Mandlebert had dined out with a party of men, and had stept in to see what was 
going forwards, without any knowledge whom he should meet: he instantly 
discerned Lavinia, and felt anxious to know why Camilla was not with her, and 
why she sat so much out of sight: but Camilla so completely hid herself, he 
could only see there was a female, whom he concluded to be some Etherington 
lady; and he determined to make further enquiry when the act should be over.

The performance now became so truly ludicrous, that Camilla, notwithstanding 
all her uneasiness, was excited to almost perpetual laughter.

Desdemona, either from the effect of a bad cold, or to give more of nature to 
her repose, breathed so hard, as to raise a general laugh in the audience; Sir 
Sedley, stopping his ears, exclaimed, 'O! if she snores I shall plead for her 
no more, if she tear her gown to tatters! Suffocation is much too lenient for 
her. She's an immense horrid personage! nasal to alarm!'

Othello then entered, with a tallow candle in his hand, staring and dropping 
grease at every step; and, having just declared he would not

Scar that vhiter skin of hers than snow,
perceived a thief in the candle, which made it run down so fast over his hand, 
and the sleeve of his coat, that, the moment not being yet arrived for 
extinguishing it, he was forced to lay down his sword, and, for want of better 
means, snuff it with his fingers.

Sir Sedley now protested himself completely disordered: 'I must be gone,' cried 
he, 'incontinently; this exceeds resistance: I shan't be alive in another 
minute. Are you able to form a notion of anything more annihilating? If I did 
not build upon the pleasure of seeing him stop up those distressing nostrils of 
the gentle Desdemona, I could not breathe here another instant.'

But just after, while Othello leant over the bed to say—

Vhen I've pluck'd the rose
I cannot give it wital growth again,
It needs must vither——
his black locks caught fire.

The candle now fell from his hand, and he attempted to pull off his wig; but it 
had been tied close on, to appear more natural, and his fright disabled him; he 
therefore flung himself upon the bed, and rolled the coverlid over his head.

Desdemona, excessively frightened, started up, and jumped out, shrieking 
aloud—'O, Lord! I shall be burnt!'

This noble Venetian Dame then exhibited, beneath an old white satin bedgown, 
made to cover her arms and breast, the dress in which she had equipped herself, 
between the acts, to be ready for trampling home; namely, a dirty red and white 
linen gown, an old blue stuff quilted coat, and black shoes and stockings.

In this pitiable condition, she was running, screaming, off the stage, when 
Othello, having quenched the fire, unconscious that half his curls had fallen a 
sacrifice to the flames, hastily pursued her, and, in a violent passion, called 
her a fool, and brought her back to the bed; in which he assisted her to 
compose herself, and then went behind the scenes to light his candle; which 
having done, he gravely returned, and, very carefully putting it down, renewed 
his part with the line.

Be thus vhen thou art dead, and I vill kill thee
And love thee after—
Amidst roars of laughter from the whole audience, who, when he kissed her, 
almost with one voice called out—'Ay ay, that's right—kiss and friends!'

And when he said—

I must veep——
'So must I too, my good friend,' cried Sir Sedley, wiping his eyes, 'for never 
yet did sorrow cost me more salt rheum! Poor Blacky! thou hast been most 
indissolubly comic, I confess. Thou hast unstrung me to a degree. A baby of 
half an hour might demolish me.'

And again, when Othello exclaimed—

She vakes!
'The deuce she does?' cried Sir Sedley, 'what! has she been asleep again 
already? She's a very caricatura of Morpheus. Ay, do thy worst, honest Mungo. I 
can't possibly beg her off. I would sooner snift thy farthing candle once a 
day, than sustain that nasal cadence ever more.'

'He's the finest fellow upon the face of the earth,' cried Mr. Macdersey, who 
had listened to the whole play with the most serious interest; 'the instant he 
suspects his wife, he cuts her off without ceremony; though she's dearer to him 
than his eye sight, and beautiful as an angel. How I envy him!'

'Don't you think 'twould have been as well,' said General Kinsale, 'if he'd 
first made some little enquiry?'

'He can do that afterwards, General; and then nobody will dare surmise it's out 
of weakness. For to be sure and certain, he ought to right her fame; that's no 
more than his duty, after once he has satisfied his own. But a man's honour is 
dearest to him of all things. A wife's a bauble to it—not worth a thought.'

The suffocating was now beginning but just as Desdemona begged to be spared—

But alf han our—
the door-keeper forced his way into the pit, and called out—'Pray, is one 
Miss Tyrold here in the play-house?'

The sisters, in much amazement hung back, entreating the gentlemen to screen 
them; and the man, receiving no answer, went away.

While wondering what this could mean, the play was finished, when one of the 
comedians, a brother of the Worcestershire Desdemona, came to the pit door, 
calling out—'Hi'm desired to hask hif Miss Camilla Tyrold's hany way ere hin 
the ouse, for hi'm hordered to call er hout, for her Huncle's hill and dying.'

A piercing shriek from Camilla now completed the interruption of all attention 
to the performance, and betrayed her hiding place. Concealment, indeed, was 
banished her thoughts, and she would herself have opened the box door to rush 
out, had not the Major anticipated her, seizing, at the same time, her hand to 
conduct her through the crowd.
