
Three Golden Maxims

Lavinia, almost equally terrified, followed her sister; and Sir Sedley, burying 
all foppery in compassion and good nature, was foremost to accompany and 
assist. Camilla had no thought but to get instantly to Cleves; she considered 
not how; she only forced herself rapidly on, persuaded she could walk it in ten 
minutes, and ejaculating incessantly, 'My Uncle!—my dear Uncle!'—

They almost instantly encountered Edgar, who, upon the fatal call, had darted 
round to meet them, and finding each provided with an attendant, inquired whose 
carriage he should seek?

Camilla, in a broken voice, answered she had no carriage, and should walk.

'Walk?' he repeated; 'you are near five miles from Cleves!'

Scarce in her senses, she hurried on without reply.

'What carriage did you come in, Miss Tyrold?' said Edgar to Lavinia.

'We came with Mrs. Arlbery.'

'Mrs. Arlbery?—she has been gone this half hour; I met her as I entered.'

Camilla had now rushed out of doors, still handed by the Major.

'If you have no carriage in waiting,' said Edgar, 'make use, I beseech you, of 
mine!'

'O, gladly! O, thankfully!' cried Camilla, almost sobbing out her words.

He flew then to call for his chaise, and the door-keeper, for whom Sir Sedley 
had inquired, came to them, accompanied by Jacob.

'O, Jacob!' she cried, breaking violently from the Major, 'tell me!—tell 
me!—my Uncle!—my dearest Uncle!'

Jacob, in a tone of deep and unfeigned sorrow, said, his Master had been seized 
suddenly with the gout in his stomach, and that the doctor, who had been 
instantly fetched, had owned there was little hope.

She could hear no more; the shock overpowered her, and she sunk nearly 
senseless into the arms of her sister.

She was recovered, however, almost in a minute, and carried by Edgar into his 
chaise, in which he placed her between himself and the weeping Lavinia; hastily 
telling the two gentlemen, that his intimate connection with the family 
authorized his assisting and attending them at such a period.

This was too well known to be disputed; and Sir Sedley and the Major, with 
great concern, uttered their good wishes and retreated.

Jacob had already been for Mr. Tyrold, who had set off instantaneously on 
horseback.

Camilla spoke not a word the first mile, which was spent in an hysteric 
sobbing: but, recovering a little afterwards, and sinking on the shoulder of 
her sister, 'O, Lavinia!' she cried, 'should we lose my Uncle——'

A shower of tears wetted the neck of Lavinia, who mingled with them her own, 
though less violently, from having less connection with Sir Hugh, and a 
sensibility less ungovernable.

She called herself upon the postillion to drive faster, and pressed Edgar 
continually to hurry him; but though he gave every charge she could desire, so 
much swifter were her wishes than any possible speed, that twenty times she 
entreated to get out, believing she could walk quicker than the horses galloped.

When they arrived at the park gate, she was with difficulty held back from 
opening the chaise door; and when, at length, they stopt at the house porch, 
she could not wait for the step, and before Edgar could either precede or 
prevent her, threw herself into the arms of Jacob, who, having just dismounted, 
was fortunately at hand to save her from falling.

She stopt not to ask any question; 'My Uncle!—my Uncle!' she cried, 
impetuously, and, rushing past all she met, was in his room in a moment.

Edgar, though he could not obstruct, followed her close, dreading lest Sir Hugh 
might already be no more, and determined, in that case, to force her from the 
fatal spot.

Eugenia, who heard her footstep, received her at the door, but took her 
immediately from the room, softly whispering, while her arms were thrown round 
her waist—'He will live! he will live, my sister! his agonies are over—he 
is fallen asleep, and he will live!'

This was too sudden a joy for the desponding Camilla, whose breath instantly 
stopt, and who must have fallen upon the floor, had she not been caught by 
Edgar; who, though his own eyes copiously overflowed with delight, at such 
unexpected good news of the universally beloved Baronet, had strength and 
exertion sufficient to carry her downstairs into the parlour, accompanied by 
Eugenia.

There, hartshorn and water presently revived her, and then, regardless of the 
presence of Edgar, she cast herself upon her knees, to utter a fervent 
thanksgiving, in which Eugenia, with equal piety, though more composure, joined.

Edgar had never yet beheld her in a light so resplendent—What a heart, 
thought he, is here! what feelings, what tenderness, what animation!—O, what 
a heart!—were it possible to touch it!

The two sisters went both gently up stairs, encouraging and congratulating each 
other in soft whispers, and stationed themselves in an ante-room: Mr. Tyrold, 
by medical counsel, giving directions that no one but himself should enter the 
sick chamber.

Edgar, though he only saw the domestics, could not persuade himself to leave 
the house till near two o'clock in the morning: and by six, his anxiety brought 
him thither again. He then heard, that the Baronet had passed a night of more 
pain than danger, the gout having been expelled his stomach, though it had been 
threatening almost every other part.

Three days and nights passed in this manner; during which, Edgar saw so much of 
the tender affections, and softer character of Camilla, that nothing could have 
withheld him from manifesting his entire sympathy in her feelings, but the 
unaccountable circumstance of her starting forth from a back seat at the play, 
where she had sat concealed, attended by the Major, and without any matron 
protectress.

Miss Margland, meanwhile, scowled at him, and Indiana pouted in vain. His 
earnest solicitude for Sir Hugh surmounted every such obstacle to his present 
visits at Cleves; and he spent there almost the whole of his time.

On the fourth day of the attack, Sir Hugh had a sleep of five hours' 
continuance, from which he awoke so much revived, that he raised himself in his 
bed, and called out—'My dear Brother! you are still here?—you are very good 
to me, indeed; poor sinner that I am! to forgive me for all my bad behaviour to 
your Children.'

'My dearest Brother! my Children, like myself, owe you nothing but kindness and 
beneficence; and, like myself, feel for you nothing but gratitude and 
tenderness.'

'They are very good, very good indeed,' said Sir Hugh, with a deep sigh; 'but 
Eugenia!—poor little Eugenia has nearly been the death of me; though not 
meaning it in the least, being all her life as innocent as a lamb.'

Mr. Tyrold assured him, that Eugenia was attached to him with the most 
unalterable fondness. But Sir Hugh said, that the sight of her, returning from 
Etherington, with nearly the same sadness as ever, had wounded him to the 
heart, by shewing him she would never recover; which had brought back upon him 
all his first contrition, about the smallpox, and the fall from the plank, and 
had caused his conscience to give him so many twitches, that it never let him 
rest a moment, till the gout seized upon his stomach, and almost took him off 
at once.

Mr. Tyrold attributed solely to his own strong imagination the idea of the 
continuance of the dejection of Eugenia, as she had left Etherington calm, and 
almost chearful. He instantly, therefore, fetched her, intimating the species 
of consolation she could afford.

'Kindest of Uncles!' cried she, 'is it possible you can ever, for a moment, 
have doubted the grateful affection with which your goodness has impressed me 
from my childhood? Do me more justice, I beseech you, my dearest Uncle! recover 
from this terrible attack, and you shall soon see your Eugenia restored to all 
the happiness you can wish her.'

'Nobody has got such kind nieces as me!' cried Sir Hugh, again dissolving into 
tenderness; 'for all nobody has deserved so ill of them. My generous little 
Camilla, forgave me from the very first, before her young soul had any guile in 
it, which, God knows, it never has had to this hour, no more than your own. 
However, this I can tell you, which may serve to keep you from repenting being 
good, and that is, that your kindness to your poor Uncle may be the means of 
saving a christian's life; which, for a young person at your age, is as much as 
can be expected: for I think, I may yet get about again, if I could once be 
assured I should see you as happy as you used to be; and you've been the 
contentedest little thing, till those unlucky market-women, that ever was seen: 
always speaking up for the servants, and the poor, from the time you were eight 
years old. And never letting me be angry, but taking every body's part, and 
thinking them all as good as yourself, and only wanting to make them as happy.'

'Ah, my dear Uncle! how kind a memory is yours! retaining only what can give 
pleasure, and burying in oblivion whatever might cause pain!—'

'Is my Uncle well enough to speak?' cried Camilla, softly opening the door, 
'and may I—for one single moment,—see him?——'

'That's the voice of my dear Camilla!' said Sir Hugh; 'come in, my little love, 
for I shan't shock your tender heart now, for I'm going to get better.'

Camilla, in an ecstasy, was instantly at his bedside, passionately exclaiming, 
'My dear, dear Uncle! will you indeed recover?—'

Sir Hugh, throwing his feeble arms round her neck, and leaning his head upon 
her shoulder, could only faintly articulate, 'If God pleases, I shall, my 
little darling, my heart's delight and joy! But don't vex, whether I do or not, 
for it is but in the course of nature for a man to die, even in his youth; but 
how much more when he comes to be old? Though I know you can't help missing me, 
in particular at the first, because of all your goodness to me.'

'Missing you? O my Uncle! we can never be happy again without you! never 
never!—when your loved countenance no longer smiles upon us,—when your kind 
voice no longer assembles us around you!—--'

'My dear child—my own little Camilla,' cried Sir Hugh, in a faint voice, 'I 
am ready to die!'

Mr. Tyrold here forced her away, and his brother grew so much worse, that a 
dangerous relapse took place, and for three days more, the physician, the 
nurse, and Mr. Tyrold, were alone allowed to enter his room.

During this time, the whole family suffered the truest grief, and Camilla was 
inconsolable.

When again he began to revive, he called Mr. Tyrold to him, and said that this 
second shake persuaded him he had but a short time more for this world; and 
begged therefore he would prepare him for his exit.

Mr. Tyrold complied, and found, with more happiness than surprise, his perfect 
and chearful resignation either to live or to die, rejoicing as much as 
himself, in the innocent benevolence of his past days.

Composed and strengthened by religious duties, he then desired to see Eugenia 
and Indiana, that he might give them his last exhortations and counsel, in case 
of a speedy end.

Mr. Tyrold would fain have spared him this touching exertion, but he declared 
he could not go off with a clear conscience, unless he told them the advice 
which he had been thinking of for them, between whiles, during all his illness.

Mr. Tyrold then feared that opposition might but discompose him, and summoned 
his youngest daughter and his niece, charging them both to repress their 
affliction, lest it should accelerate what they most dreaded.

Camilla, always upon the watch, glided in with them, supplicating her Father 
not to deny her admittance; though fearful of her impetuous sorrows, he wished 
her to retreat; but Sir Hugh no sooner heard her murmuring voice, than he 
declared he would have her refused nothing, though he had meant to take a 
particular leave of her alone, for the last thing of all.

Gratefully thanking him, she advanced trembling to his bedside; solemnly 
promising her Father that no expression of her grief should again risk 
agitating a life and health so precious.

Sir Hugh then desired to have Lavinia called also, because, though he had 
thought of nothing to say to her, she might be hurt, after he was gone, in 
being left out.

He was then raised by pillows and sat upright, and they knelt round his bed. 
Mr. Tyrold entreated him to be concise, and insisted upon the extremest 
forbearance and fortitude in his little audience. He seated himself at some 
distance, and Sir Hugh, after swallowing a cordial medicine, began:

'My dear Nieces, I have sent for you all upon a particular account, which I beg 
you to listen to, because, God only knows whether I may ever be able to give 
you so much advice again. I see you all look very melancholy, which I take very 
kind of you. However don't cry, my little dears, for we must all go off, so it 
matters but little the day or the hour; dying being, besides, the greatest 
comfort of us all, taking us off from our cares; as my Brother will explain to 
you better than me.

'The chief of what I have got to say, in regard to what I have been studying in 
my illness, is for you two, my dear Eugenia and Indiana; because, having 
brought you both up, I can't get it out of my head what you'll do, when I am no 
longer here to keep you out of the danger of bad designers.

'My hope had been to have seen you both married while I was alive and amongst 
you, and I made as many plans as my poor head knew how, to bring it about; but 
we've all been disappointed alike, for which reason we must put up with it 
properly.

'What I have now last of all, to say to you, my little dears, is three maxims, 
which may serve for you all four alike, though I thought of them, at first, 
only for you two.

'In the first place, Never be proud: if you are, your superiors will laugh at 
you, your equals won't love you, and your dependants will hate you. And what is 
there for poor mortal man to be proud of?—Riches!—--why they are but a 
charge, and if we don't use them well, we may envy the poor beggar that has so 
much less to answer for.—Beauty!—--why, we can neither get it when we 
haven't it; nor keep it when we have it.—Power!—--why we scarce ever use it 
one way, but what we are sorry we did not use it another!

'In the second place, Never trust a Flatterer. If a man makes you a great many 
compliments, always suspect him of some bad design, and never believe him your 
friend, till he tells you of some of your faults. Poor little things! you 
little imagine how many you have, for all you're so good!

'In the third place, Do no harm to others, for the sake of any good it may do 
to yourselves; because the good will last you but a little while; and the 
repentance will stick by you as long as you live; and what is worse, a great 
while longer, and beyond any count the best Almanack-maker knows how to reckon.

'And now, my dear Nieces, this is all; except the recommending to my dear 
Eugenia to be kind to my poor servants, who have all used me so well, knowing I 
have nothing to leave them.'

Eugenia, suppressing her sobs, promised to retain them all, as long as they 
should desire to remain with her, and to provide for them afterwards.

'I know, you'll forget nobody, my dear little girl,' cried the Baronet, 'which 
makes me die contented; not even Mrs. Margland, a little particularity not 
being to be considered at one's last end: and much less Dr. Orkborne, who has 
so much a better right from you. As to Indiana, she'll have her own little 
fortune when she comes of age; and I dare say her pretty face will marry her 
before long.—And as to Clermont, he'll come off rather short, finding I leave 
him nothing; but you'll make up for the deficiency, by giving him the whole, as 
well as a good wife. As to Lionel, I leave him my blessing; and as to any other 
legacy I never happened to promise him any; which is very good luck for me, as 
well as my best excuse; and I may say the same to my dear Lavinia, which is the 
reason I called her in, because she may not often have an opportunity to hear a 
man speak upon his death-bed. However all I wish for is, that I could leave you 
all equal shares, as well as give Eugenia the whole.'

'O my dear Uncle!' exclaimed Eugenia, 'make a new Will immediately! do 
everything your tenderness can dictate!—or tell me what I shall do in your 
name, and every word, every wish shall be sacredly obeyed!'

'Dear, generous, noble girl! no! I won't take from you a shilling! keep it 
all—nobody will spend it so well;—and I can't give you back your beauty; so 
keep it, my dear, all, for my oath's sake, when I am gone; and don't make me 
die under a prevaricating; which would be but a grievous thing for a person to 
do; unless he was but a bad believer: which, God help us! there are enough, 
without my helping to make more.'

Mr. Tyrold now again remonstrated, motioning to the weeping group to be gone.

'Ah! my dear Brother!' said Sir Hugh, 'you are the only right person that ought 
to have had it all, if it had not been for my poor weak brain, that made me 
always be looking askew instead of strait forward. And indeed I always meant 
you to have had it for your life, till the smallpox put all things out of my 
head. However, I hope you won't object to preach my funeral sermon, for all my 
bad faults, for nobody else will speak of me so kindly; which may serve as a 
better lesson for those I leave behind.'

Tears flowed fast down the cheeks of Mr. Tyrold, as he uttered whatever he 
could suggest most tenderly soothing to his Brother: and the young mourners, 
not daring to resist, were all gliding away, except Camilla, whose hand was 
fast grasped in that of her Uncle.

'Ah, my Camilla,' cried he, as she would gently have withdrawn it, 'how shall I 
part with my little dear darling? this is the worst twitch to me of all, with 
all my contentedness! And the more because I know you love your poor old Uncle, 
just as well as if he had left you all he was worth, though you won't get one 
penny by his death!'

'O my dear, dearest Uncle—' exclaimed Camilla, in a passionate flood of 
tears; when Mr. Tyrold, assuring them both the consequences might be fatal, 
tore her away from the bed and the room.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

VOLUME III

BOOK V
