
An Adviser

The wish of Camilla was to lay this whole affair before her father; but she 
checked it, from an apprehension she might seem displaying her duty and 
confidence at the expence of those of her sister; whose motives for concealment 
were intentionally the most pure, however, practically, they might be 
erroneous; and whom she both pitied and revered for her proposed submission to 
her uncle, in opposition to her palpable reluctance.

She saw not, however, any obstacle to consulting with Edgar, since he was 
already apprised of the business, and since his services might be essentially 
useful to her sister: while, with respect to herself, there seemed, at this 
time, more of dignity in meeting than shunning his friendly intercourse, since 
his regard for her seemed to have lost all its peculiarity. He has precisely, 
cried she, the same sentiments for my sisters as for me,—he is equally kind, 
disinterested, and indifferent to us all! anxious alike for Eugenia with Mr. 
Bellamy, and for me with the detestable Major! Be it so!—we can no where 
obtain a better friend; and I should blush, indeed, if I could not treat as a 
brother one who can treat me as a sister.

Tranquil, though not gay, she returned to converse with him; but when she had 
related what had passed, he confessed that his uneasiness upon the subject was 
increased. The heart of Eugenia appeared to him positively entangled; and he 
besought Camilla not to lose a moment in acquainting Mr. Tyrold with her 
situation.

She pleaded against giving this pain to her sister with energetic affection: 
her arguments failed to convince, but her eloquence powerfully touched him; and 
he contented himself with only entreating that she would again try to aid him 
with an opportunity of conversing with Eugenia.

This she could not refuse; nor could he then resist the opportunity to inquire 
why Mrs. Arlbery had left her and Lavinia at the play. She thanked him for 
remembering his character of her monitor, and acknowledged the fault to be her 
own, with a candour so unaffected, that, captivated by the soft seriousness of 
her manner, he flattered himself his fear of the Major was a chimæra, and 
hoped that, as soon as Sir Hugh was able to again join his family, no 
impediment would remain to his begging the united blessings of the two brothers 
to his views.

When Camilla told her sister the request of Edgar, she immediately suspected 
the attachment of Bellamy had been betrayed to him; and Camilla, incapable of 
any duplicity, related precisely how the matter had passed. Eugenia, always 
just, no sooner heard than she forgave it, and accompanied her sister 
immediately down stairs.

'I must rest all my hope of pardon,' cried Edgar, 'for the part I am taking, to 
your conviction of its motive; a filial love and gratitude to Mr. Tyrold, a 
fraternal affection and interest for all his family.'

'My own sisterly feelings,' she answered, 'make me both comprehend and thank 
your kind solicitude: but, believe me, it is now founded in error. I am shocked 
to find you informed of this unhappy transaction; and I charge and beseech that 
no interference may wound its ill-fated object, by suffering him to surmise 
your knowledge of his humiliating situation.'

'I would not for the world give you pain,' answered Edgar: 'but permit me to be 
faithful to the brotherly character in which I consider myself to stand with 
you ... all.'

A blush had overspread his face at the word Brotherly; while at that of all, 
which recovered him, a still deeper stained the cheeks of Camilla: but neither 
of them looked at the other; and Eugenia was too self-absorbed to observe 
either.

'Your utter inexperience in life,' he continued, 'makes me, though but just 
giving up leading-strings myself, an adept in the comparison. Suffer me then, 
as such, to represent to you my fears, that your innocence and goodness may 
expose you to imposition. You must not judge all characters by the 
ingenuousness of your own; nor conclude, however rationally and worthily a mind 
such as yours might—may—and will inspire a disinterested regard, that there 
is no danger of any other, and that mercenary views are out of the question, 
because mercenary principles are not declared.'

'I will not say your inference is severe,' replied Eugenia, 'because you know 
not the person of whom you speak: but permit me to make this irrefragable 
vindication of his freedom from all sordid motives; he has never once named the 
word fortune, neither to make any inquiries into mine, nor any professions 
concerning his own. Had he any inducement to duplicity, he might have asserted 
to me what he pleased, since I have no means of detection.'

'Your situation,' said Edgar, 'is pretty generally known; and for his ... 
pardon me if I hint it may be possible that silence is no virtue. However, 
since I am unacquainted, you say, with his character, will you give me leave to 
make myself better informed?'

'There needs no investigation; to me it is perfectly known.'

'Forgive me if I ask how!'

'By his letters and by his conversation.'

A smile which stole upon the features of Edgar obliged him to turn his head 
another way; but presently recovering, 'My dear Miss Eugenia,' he cried, 'will 
it not be most consonant to your high principles, and scrupulous delicacy, to 
lay the whole of what has passed before Mr. Tyrold?'

'Undoubtedly, if my part were not strait forward. Had I the least hesitation, 
my father should be my immediate and decisive umpire. But ... I am not at 
liberty even for deliberation!—I am not ... I know ... at my own disposal!'—

She blushed and looked down, confused; but presently, with firmness, added, 'It 
is not, indeed, fit that I should be; my uncle completely merits to be in all 
things my director. To know his wishes, therefore, is not only to know, but to 
be satisfied with my doom. Such being my situation, you cannot misunderstand my 
defence of this unhappy young man. It is but simple justice to rescue an 
amiable person from calumny.'

'Let us allow all this,' said Edgar; 'still I see no reason why Mr. Tyrold....'

'Mr. Mandlebert,' interrupted she, 'you must do what you judge right. I can 
desire no one to abstain from pursuing the dictates of their own sense of 
honour. I leave you, therefore, unshackled: but there is no consideration 
which, in my opinion, can justify a female in spreading, even to her nearest 
connexions, an unrequited partiality. If, therefore, I am forced to inflict 
this undue mortification, upon a person to whom I hold myself so much obliged, 
an uneasiness will remain upon my mind, destructive of my forgetfulness of an 
event which I would fain banish from my memory.'

She then refused to be any longer detained.

'How I love the perfect innocence, and how I reverence the respectable 
singularity of that charming character!' cried Edgar; 'yet how vain are all 
arguments against such a combination of fearless credulity, and enthusiastic 
reasoning? What can we determine?'

'I am happy to retort upon you that question,' replied Camilla; 'for I am every 
way afraid to act myself, lest I should hurt this dear sister, or do wrong by 
my yet dearer father.'

'What a responsibility you cast upon me! I will not, however, shrink from it, 
for the path seems far plainer to me since I have had this conversation. 
Eugenia is at present safe; I see, now, distinctly, her heart is yet untouched. 
The readiness with which she met the subject, the openness with which she avows 
her esteem, the unembarrassed, though modest simplicity with which she speaks 
of his passion and his distress, all shew that her pity results from 
generosity, not from love. Had it been otherwise, with all her steadiness, all 
her philosophy, some agitation and anxiety would have betrayed her secret soul. 
The internal workings of hopes and fears, the sensitive alarms of repressed 
consciousness....' A deep glow, which heated his face, forced him here to break 
off; and, abruptly leaving his sentence unfinished, he hastily began another.

'We must not, nevertheless, regard this as security for the future, though it 
is safety for the present; nor trust her unsuspicious generosity of mind to the 
dangerous assault of artful distress. I speak without reserve of this man; for 
though I know him not, as she remonstrated, I cannot, from the whole 
circumstances of his clandestine conduct, doubt his being an adventurer.... You 
say nothing? tell me, I beg, your opinion.'

Camilla had not heard one word of this last speech. Struck with his 
discrimination between the actual and the possible state of Eugenia's mind, and 
with the effect the definition had produced upon himself, her attention was 
irresistibly seized by a new train of ideas, till finding he waited for an 
answer, she mechanically repeated his last word 'opinion?'

He saw her absence of mind, and suspected his own too palpable disturbance had 
occasioned it: but in what degree, or from what sensations, he could not 
conjecture. They were both some time silent; and then, recollecting herself, 
she said it was earnestly her wish to avoid disobliging her sister, by a 
communication, which, made by any one but herself, must put her into a 
disgraceful point of view.

Edgar, after a pause, said, they must yield, then, to her present fervour, and 
hope her sounder judgment, when less played upon, would see clearer. It 
appeared to him, indeed, that she was so free, at this moment, from any 
dangerous impression, that it might, perhaps, be even safer to submit quietly 
to her request, than to urge the generous romance of her temper to new 
workings. He undertook, meantime, to keep a constant watch upon the motions of 
Bellamy, to make sedulous inquiries into his character and situation in life, 
and to find out for what ostensible purpose he was in Hampshire: entreating 
leave to communicate constantly to Camilla what he might gather, and to consult 
with her, from time to time, upon what measures should be pursued: yet 
ultimately confessing, that if Eugenia did not steadily persist in refusing any 
further rejections, he should hold himself bound in conscience to communicate 
the whole to Mr. Tyrold.

Camilla was pleased, and even thankful for the extreme friendliness and kind 
moderation of this arrangement; yet she left him mournfully, in a confirmed 
belief his regard for the whole family was equal.

Eugenia, much gratified, promised she would henceforth take no step with which 
Edgar should not first be acquainted.
