
A Dodging

Camilla waited in the apartment of Mr. Tyrold till he came up stairs, and then 
begged his leave to spend a few days at the Grove; hinting, when he hesitated, 
though with a confusion that was hardly short of torture, at what had passed 
amongst the servants.

He heard her with the tenderest pity, and the kindest praise of her sincerity; 
and, deeply as he was shocked to find her thus generally betrayed, he was too 
compassionate to point out, at so suffering a moment, the indiscretions from 
which such observations must have originated. Yet he saw consequences the most 
unpleasant in this rumour of her attachment; and though he still privately 
hoped that the behaviour of Mandlebert was the effect of some transient 
embarrassment, he wished her removed from all intercourse with him that was not 
sought by himself, while the incertitude of his intentions militated against 
her struggles for indifference. The result, therefore, of a short deliberation 
was to accede to her request.

Camilla then wrote her proposition to Mrs. Arlbery, which Mr. Tyrold sent 
immediately by a stable-boy of the baronet's.

The answer was most obliging; Mrs. Arlbery said she would herself fetch her the 
next morning, and keep her till one of them should be tired.

The relief which this, at first, brought to Camilla, in the week's exertions it 
would spare, was soon succeeded by the most acute uneasiness for the critical 
situation of Eugenia, and the undoubted disapprobation of Edgar. To quit her 
sister at a period when she might serve her; ... to forsake Cleves at the 
moment Edgar was restored to it, seemed selfish even to herself, and to him 
must appear unpardonable. 'Alas!' she cried, 'how for ever I repent my hasty 
actions! Why have I not better struggled against my unfortunate feelings?'

She now almost hated her whole scheme, regretted its success, wished herself 
suffering every uneasiness Miss Margland could inflict, and all the shame of 
being watched and pitied by every servant in the house, in preference to 
deserting Eugenia, and making Mandlebert deem her unworthy. But self-upbraiding 
was all that followed her contrition: Mrs. Arlbery was to fetch her by 
appointment; and it was now too late to trifle with the conceding goodness of 
her father.

She did not dare excuse herself from appearing at breakfast the next morning, 
lest Mr. Tyrold should think her utterly incorrigible to his exhortations.

Edgar earnestly inquired after her health as she entered the room; she slightly 
answered she was better; and began eating, with an apparent eagerness of 
appetite: while he, who had expected some kind words upon his own accident, 
surprised and disappointed, could swallow nothing.

Mr. Tyrold, seeing and pitying what passed in her mind, gave her a commission, 
that enabled her, soon, to leave the room without affectation; and, happy to 
escape, she determined to go down stairs no more till Mrs. Arlbery arrived. She 
wished to have conversed first upon the affairs of Eugenia with Edgar: but to 
name to him whither she was herself going, when she could not possibly name 
why; to give to him a surprise that must recoil upon herself in disapprobation, 
was more than she could endure. She had invested him with full powers to 
counsel and to censure her; he would naturally use them to dissuade her from a 
visit so ill-timed; and what could she urge in opposition to his arguments that 
would not seem trifling or wilful?

The present moment was all that occupied, the present evil all that ever 
alarmed the breast of Camilla: to avoid him, therefore, now, was the whole of 
her desire, unmolested with one anxiety how she might better meet him hereafter.

She watched at her window till she saw the groom of Mrs. Arlbery gallop into 
the Park. She hastened then to take leave of Sir Hugh, whom Mr. Tyrold had 
prepared for her departure; but, at the door of his apartment, she encountered 
Edgar.

'You are going out?' cried he, perceiving an alteration in her dress.

'I am ... just going to ... to speak to my uncle,' cried she, stammering and 
entering the room at the same moment.

Sir Hugh kindly wished her much amusement, and hoped she would make him long 
amends when he was better. She took leave; but again, on the landing-place, met 
Edgar, who, anxious and perlexed, watched to speak to her before she descended 
the stairs. Eagerly advancing, 'Do you walk?' he cried; 'may I ask? or ... am I 
indiscreet?'

She answered she had something to say to Eugenia, but should be back in an 
instant. She then flew to the chamber of her sister, and conjured her to 
consult Edgar in whatever should occur during her absence. Eugenia solemnly 
consented.

Jacob presently tapped at the door, to announce that Mrs. Arlbery was waiting 
below in her carriage.

How to pass or escape Edgar became now her greatest difficulty; she could 
suggest nothing to palliate to him the step she was taking, yet could still 
less bear to leave him to wild conjecture and certain blame: and she was 
standing irresolute and thoughtful, when Mr. Tyrold came to summon her.

After mildly representing the indecorum of detaining any one she was to receive 
by appointment, he took her apart, and putting a packet into her hand, 'I would 
not,' he said, 'agitate your spirits this morning, by entering upon any topic 
that might disturb you: I have therefore put upon paper what I most desire you 
to consider. You will find it a little sermon upon the difficulties and the 
conduct of the female heart. Read it alone, and with attention. And now, my 
dearest girl, go quietly into the parlour, and let one brief and cheerful 
good-morrow serve for every body alike.'

He then returned to his brother.

She made Eugenia accompany her down stairs, to avoid any solitary attack from 
Edgar; he suffered them to pass; but followed to the parlour, where she hastily 
bid adieu to Miss Margland and Indiana; but was stopt from running off by the 
former, who said, 'I wish I had known you intended going out, for I designed 
asking Sir Hugh for the chariot for myself this morning, to make a very 
particular visit.'

Camilla, in a hesitating voice, said she should not use her uncle's chariot.

'You walk then?'

'No, ... ma'am ... but—there is—there is a carriage—I believe, now at the 
door.'

'O dear, whose?' cried Indiana; 'do, pray, tell me where you are going?' while 
Edgar, still more curious than either, held out his hand to conduct her, that 
he might obtain better information.

'I am very glad your head-ache is so well,' said Miss Margland; 'but, pray—is 
Mr. Mandlebert to be your chaperon?'

They both blushed, though both affected not to hear her: but, before they could 
quit the room, Indiana, who had run to a bow-window, exclaimed, 'Dear! if there 
is not Mrs. Arlbery in a beautiful high phaeton!'

Edgar, astonished, was now as involuntarily drawing back, as Camilla, 
involuntarily, was hurrying on: but Miss Margland, insisting upon an answer, 
desired to know if she should return to dinner?

She stammered out, No. Miss Margland pursued her to ask at what time the 
chariot was to fetch her; and forced from her a confession that she should be 
away for some days.

She was now permitted to proceed. Edgar, impressed with the deepest 
displeasure, leading her in silence across the hall: but, stopping an instant 
at the door, 'This excursion,' he gravely said, 'will rescue you from no little 
intended importunity: I had purposed tormenting you, from time to time, for 
your opinion and directions with respect to Miss Eugenia.'

And then, bowing coldly to Mrs. Arlbery, who eagerly called out to welcome her, 
he placed her in the phaeton, which instantly drove off.

He looked after them for some time, almost incredulous of her departure: but, 
as his amazement subsided into certainty, the most indignant disappointment 
succeeded. That she could leave Cleves at the very moment he was reinstated in 
its society, seemed conviction to him of her indifference; and that she could 
leave it in the present state of the affairs of Eugenia, made him conclude her 
so great a slave to the love of pleasure, that every duty and all propriety 
were to be sacrificed to its pursuit. 'I will think of her,' cried he, 'no 
more! She concealed from me her plan, lest I should torment her with 
admonitions: the glaring homage of the Major is better adapted to her 
taste,—She flies from my sincerity to receive his adulation,—I have been 
deceived in her disposition,—I will think of her no more!'
