
A Chat

The calm sadness with which Camilla had opened her letter was soon broken in 
upon by the interest of its contents, the view it displayed of her duties, her 
shame at her recent failures, and her fears for their future execution; and yet 
more than all, by the full decision in which it seemed written, that the 
unhappy partiality she had exposed, had been always, and would for ever remain 
unreturned.

She started at the intimation how near she stood to detection even from Edgar 
himself, and pride, reason, modesty, all arose to strengthen her with 
resolution, to guard every future conflict from his observation.

The article concerning fortune touched her to the quick. Nothing appeared to 
her so degrading as the most distant idea that such a circumstance could have 
any force with her. But the justice done to Edgar she gloried in, as an apology 
for her feelings, and exculpatory of her weakness. Her tears flowed fast at 
every expression of kindness to herself, her burning blushes dried them up as 
they were falling, at every hint of her feebleness, and the hopelessness of its 
cause; but wholly subdued by the last paragraph, which with reverence she 
pressed to her lips, she offered up the most solemn vows of a strict and entire 
observance of every injunction which the letter contained.

She was thus employed, unnoticing the passage of time, when Mrs. Arlbery tapped 
at her door, and asked if she wished to dine in her own room.

Surprised at the question, and ashamed to be thus seen, she was beginning a 
thousand apologies for not being yet dressed: but Mrs. Arlbery, interrupting 
her, said, 'I never listen to excuses. 'Tis the only battery that overpowers 
me. If, by any mischance, and in an evil hour, some country cousin, not knowing 
my ways, or some antediluvian prig, not minding them, happen to fall upon me 
with formal speeches, where I can make no escape, a fit of yawning takes me 
immediately, and I am demolished for the rest of the day.'

Camilla, attempting to smile, promised to play the country cousin no more. Mrs. 
Arlbery then observed she had been weeping; and taking her hand, with an 
examining look, 'My lovely young friend,' she cried, 'this will never do!'

'What, ma'am?... how?... what?...'

'Nay, nay, don't be frightened. Come down to dinner, and we'll talk over the 
hows? and the whats? afterwards. Never mind your dress; we go no where this 
evening; and I make a point not to suffer any body to change their attire in my 
house, merely because the afternoon is taking place of the morning. It seems to 
me a miserable compliment to the mistress of a mansion, to see her guests only 
equip themselves for the table. For my part, I deem the garb that is good 
enough for me, good enough for my geese and turkies ... apple and oyster-sauce 
included.'

Camilla then followed her down stairs, where she found no company but Sir 
Sedley Clarendel.

'Come, my dear Miss Tyrold,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'you and I may now consider 
ourselves as tête-à-tête; Sir Sedley won't be much in our way. He hears and 
sees nothing but himself.'

'Ecstatically flattering that!' cried Sir Sedley; 'dulcet to every nerve!'

'O, I know you listen just now, because you are yourself my theme. But the 
moment I take another, you will forget we are either of us in the room.'

'Inhuman to the quick!' cried he; 'barbarous to a point!'

'This is a creature so strange, Miss Tyrold,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'that I must 
positively initiate you a little into his character;—or, rather, into its own 
caricature; for as to character, he has had none intelligible these three 
years.—See but how he smiles at the very prospect of being portrayed, in 
defiance of all his efforts to look unconcerned! yet he knows I shall shew him 
no mercy. But, like all other egotists, the only thing to really disconcert 
him, would be to take no notice of him. Make him but the first subject of 
discourse, and praise or abuse are pretty much the same to him.'

'O shocking! shocking! killing past resuscitation! Abominably horrid, I 
protest!'

'O I have not begun yet. This is an observation to suit thousands. But do not 
fear; you shall have all your appropriations. Miss Tyrold, you are to be 
auditor and judge: and I will save you the time and the trouble which 
decyphering this animal, so truly a non-descript, might cost you.'

'What a tremendous exordium! distressing to a degree! I am agued with 
trepidation!

'O you wretch! you know you are enchanted. But no further interruption! I send 
you to Coventry for the next ten minutes.'

'This man, my dear Miss Tyrold, whom we are about to delineate, was meant by 
nature, and prepared by art, for something greatly superior to what he now 
appears: but, unhappily, he had neither solidity of judgment, nor humility of 
disposition, for bearing meekly the early advantages with which he set out in 
life; a fine person, fine parts, and a fine estate, all dashed into 
consciousness at the presuming age of one and twenty. By this aggregate of 
wealthy, of mental, and of personal prosperity, he has become at once self 
spoilt, and world spoilt. Had you known him, as I have done, before he was 
seized with this systematic affectation, which, I am satisfied, causes him more 
study than the united pedants of both universities could inflict upon him, you 
would have seen the most delightful creature breathing! a creature combining, 
in one animated composition, the very essences of spirit, of gaiety, and of 
intelligence. But now, with every thing within his reach, nothing seems worth 
his attainment. He has not sufficient energy to make use of his own powers. He 
has no one to command him, and he is too indolent to command himself. He has 
therefore turned fop from mere wantonness of time and of talents; from having 
nothing to do, no one to care for, and no one to please. Take from him half his 
wit, and by lessening his presumption, you will cure him of all his folly. Rob 
him of his fortune, and by forcing him into exertion, you will make him one of 
the first men of his day. Deface and maim his features and figure, and by 
letting him see that to appear and be admired is not the same thing, you will 
render him irresistible.'

'Have you done?' cried the baronet smiling.

'I protest,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'I believe you are a little touched! And I 
don't at all want to reform you. A perfect character only lulls me to sleep.'

'Obliging in the superlative! I must then take as a consolation, that I have 
never given you a nap?'

'Never, Clarendel, I assure you; and yet I don't hate you! Vice is detestable; 
I banish all its appearances from my coteries; and I would banish its reality, 
too, were I sure I should then have any thing but empty chairs in my 
drawing-room—but foibles make all the charm of society. They are the only 
support of convivial raillery, and domestic wit. If formerly, therefore, you 
more excited my admiration, it is now, believe me, you contribute most to my 
entertainment.'

'Condoling to a phenomenon! I have really, then, the vastly prodigious honour 
to be exalted in your fair graces to the level of a mountebank? a quack doctor? 
his merry Andrew? or any other such respectable buffoon?'

'Piqued! piqued! I declare! this exceeds my highest ambition. But I must not 
weaken the impression by dwelling upon it.'

She then asked Camilla if she had any message for Cleves, as one of her 
servants was going close to the park gate.

Camilla, glad to withdraw, said she would write a few words to her father, and 
retired for that purpose.

'What in the world, my dear Clarendel,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'can I do with this 
poor thing? She has lost all her sprightliness, and vapours me but to look at 
her. She has all the symptoms upon her of being in the full meridian of that 
common girlish disease, an hopeless passion.'

'Poor little tender dove!' cried the baronet. ''Twould be odious to cure her. 
Unfeeling to excess. What in nature can be half so mellifluously interesting? I 
shall now look at her with most prodigious softness. Ought one not to sigh as 
she approaches?'

'The matter to be sure is silly enough,' answered Mrs. Arlbery; 'but, this 
nonsense apart, she is a charming girl. Besides, I perceive I am a violent 
favourite with her; and flattery, my dear Clarendel, will work its way, even 
with me! I really owe her a good turn: Else I should no longer endure her; for 
the tender passion has terribly flattened her. If we can't restore her spirits, 
she will be a mere dead weight to me.'

'O a very crush! a cannon ball would be a butterfly in the comparison! But who 
is the irresistible? What form has the little blind traitor assumed?'

'O, assure yourself, that of the first young man who has come in her sight. 
Every damsel, as she enters the world, has some picture ready painted upon her 
imagination, of an object worthy to enslave her: and before any experience 
forms her judgment, or any comparison her taste, she is the dupe of the first 
youth who presents himself to her, in the firm persuasion of her ductile fancy, 
that he is just the model it had previously created.'

She then added, she had little doubt but young Mandlebert was the hero, from 
their private conferences after the raffle, and from her blushes when forced to 
name him.

'Nay, nay, this is not the first incongruity!' said the young baronet, 'not 
romantic to outrage. Beech Park has nothing very horrific in it. Nothing 
invincibly beyond the standard of a young lady's philosophy.'

'Depend upon it, that's the very idea its master has conceived of the matter 
himself. You wealthy Cavaliers rarely want flappers to remind you of your 
advantages. That Mandlebert, you must know, is my aversion. He has just that 
air and reputation of faultlessness that gives me the spleen. I hope, for her 
sake, he won't think of her; he will lead her a terrible life. A man who piques 
himself upon his perfections, finds no mode so convenient and ready for 
displaying them, as proving all about him to be constantly in the wrong. 
However, a character of that stamp rarely marries; especially if he is rich, 
and has no obstacles in his way. What can I do, then, for this poor thing? The 
very nature of her malady is to make her entertain false hopes. I am quite bent 
upon curing them. The only difficulty, according to custom, is how. I wish you 
would take her in hand yourself.'

'I?... preposterous in the extreme! what particle of chance should I have 
against Mandlebert?'

'O you vain wretch! to be sure you don't know, that though he is rich, you are 
richer? and, doubtless, you never took notice, that though he is handsome, you 
are handsomer? As to manners, there is little to choose between you, for he is 
as much too correct, as you are too fantastic. In conversation, too, you are 
nearly upon a par, for he is as regularly too right, as you are ridiculously 
too wrong,—but O the charm of dear amusing wrong, over dull commanding right! 
you have but to address yourself to her with a little flattering distinction, 
and Mandlebert ever after will appear to her a pedant.'

'What a wicked sort of sprite is a female wit!' cried Sir Sedley, 'breathing 
only in mischief! a very will-o'-the-wisp, personified and petticoated, shining 
but to lead astray. Dangerous past all fathom! Have the goodness, however, my 
fair Jack-o'-lanthorn, to intimate what you mean I should do with this 
languishing dulcinea, should I deliver her from thraldom? You don't advise me, 
I presume, to take unto myself a wife? I protest I am shivered to the utmost 
point north at the bare suggestion! frozen to an icicle!'

'No, no; I know you far too confirmed an egotist for any thing but an old 
bachelor. Nor is there the least necessity to yoke the poor child to the 
conjugal plough so early. The only sacrifice I demand from you is a little 
attention; the only good I aim at for her, is to open her eyes, which have now 
a film before them, and to let her see that Mandlebert has no other 
pre-eminence, than that of having been the first young man with whom she became 
acquainted. Never imagine I want her to fall in love with you. Heaven help the 
poor victim to such a complication of caprice!'

'Nay, now I am full south again! burning with shame and choler! How you 
navigate my sensations from cold to heat at pleasure! Cooke was a mere river 
water-man to you. My blood chills or boils at your command. Every sentence is a 
new climate. You waft me from extreme to extreme, with a rapidity absolutely 
dizzying. A balloon is a broad-wheeled wagon to you.'

'Come, come, jargon apart, will you make yourself of any use? The cure of a 
romantic first flame is a better surety to subsequent discretion, than all the 
exhortations of all the fathers, and mothers, and guardians, and maiden aunts 
in the universe. Save her now, and you serve her for life;—besides giving me 
a prodigious pleasure in robbing that frigid Mandlebert of such a conquest.'

'Unhappy young swain! I pity him to immensity. How has he fallen thus under the 
rigour of your wrath? Do you banish him your favour, like another Aristides, to 
relieve your ear from hearing him called the Just?'

'Was ever allusion so impertinent? or, what is worse, for aught I can 
determine, so true? for, certainly, he has given me no offence; yet I feel I 
should be enchanted to humble him. Don't be concerned for him, however; you may 
assure yourself he hates me. There is a certain spring in our propensities to 
one another, that involuntarily opens and shuts in almost exact harmony, 
whether of approbation or antipathy. Except, indeed, in the one article of 
love, which, distinguishing nothing, is ready to grasp at any thing.'

'But why have you not recourse to the gallant cockade?'

'The Major? O, I have observed, already, she receives his devoirs without 
emotion; which, for a girl who has seen nothing of the world, is respectable 
enough, his red coat considered. Whether the man has any meaning himself, or 
whether he knows there is such a thing, I cannot tell: but as I do not wish to 
see her surrounded with brats, while a mere brat herself, it is not worth 
inquiry. You are the thing, Clarendel, the very thing! You are just agreeable 
enough to annul her puerile fascination, yet not interesting enough to involve 
her in any new danger.'

'Flattering past imitability! divine Arlberiana!'

'Girls, in general,' continued she, 'are insupportable nuisances to women. If 
you do not set them to prate about their admirers, or their admired, they die 
of weariness;—if you do, the weariness reverberates upon yourself.'

Camilla here returned. She had written a few lines to Eugenia, to enforce her 
reliance upon Edgar, with an earnest request to be sent for immediately, if any 
new difficulty occurred. And she had addressed a few warmly grateful words to 
her father, engaging to follow his every injunction with her best ability.

Sir Sedley now rung for his carriage; and Camilla, for the rest of the evening, 
exerted herself to receive more cheerfully the kind civilities of her lively 
hostess.
