
A Youth of the Times

Mrs. Arlbery accompanied Camilla the next day to Cleves, to ask permission of 
Mr. Tyrold for the excursion. She would trust the request to none but herself, 
conscious of powers of persuasion unused to repulse.

Mr. Tyrold was distressed by the proposition: he was not satisfied in trusting 
his unguarded Camilla to the dissipation of a public place, except under the 
wing of her mother; though he felt eager to remove her from Edgar, and rejoiced 
in any opportunity to allow her a change of scene, that might revive her 
natural spirits, and unchain her heart from its unhappy subjection.

Perceiving him undetermined, Mrs. Arlbery called forth all her artillery of 
eloquence and grace, to forward her conquest. The licence she allowed herself 
in common of fantastic command, gave way to the more feminine attraction of 
soft pleading: her satire, which, though never malignant, was often alarming, 
was relinquished for a sportive gaiety that diffused general animation; and Mr. 
Tyrold soon, though not caught like his daughter, ceased to wonder that his 
daughter had been caught.

In this indecision he took Camilla apart, and bade her tell him, without fear 
or reserve, her own feelings, her own wishes, her own opinion upon this scheme. 
She held such a call too serious and too kind for disguise: she hid her face 
upon his shoulder and wept; he soothed and encouraged her to confidence; and, 
in broken accents, she then acknowledged herself unequal, as yet, to fulfilling 
his injunctions of appearing cheerful and easy, though sensible of their wisdom.

Mr. Tyrold, with a heavy heart, saw how much deeper was her wound, than the 
airiness of her nature had prepared him to expect, and could no longer hesitate 
in granting his consent. He saw it was her wish to go; but he saw that the 
pleasures of a public place had no share in exciting it. To avoid betraying her 
conscious mortification was her sole and innocent motive; and though he would 
rather have sent her to a more private spot, and have trusted her to a more 
retired character; he yet thought it possible, that what opportunity presented 
unsought, might, eventually, prove more beneficial than what his own choice 
would have dictated; for public amusements, to the young and unhackneyed, give 
entertainment without requiring exertion; and spirits lively as those of Mrs. 
Arlbery create nearly as much gaiety as they display.

Fixed, now, for the journey, he carried Camilla to her uncle to take leave. The 
prospect of not seeing her again for six weeks was gloomy to Sir Hugh; though 
he bore it better at this moment, when his fancy was occupied by arranging 
preparations for the return of Clermont, than he could have done at almost any 
other. He put into her hand a fifty pound Bank note for her expences, and when, 
with mingled modesty and dejection, she would have returned the whole, as 
unnecessary even to her wishes, Mr. Tyrold, interfering, made her accept twenty 
pounds. Sir Hugh pressed forward the original sum in vain; his brother, though 
always averse to refuse his smallest desire, thought it here a duty to be firm, 
that the excursion, which he granted as a relief to her sadness, might not lead 
to pleasures ever after beyond her reach, nor to their concomitant 
extravagance. She could not, he knew, reside at Tunbridge with the œconomy and 
simplicity to which she was accustomed at Etherington; but he charged her to 
let no temptation make her forget the moderate income of which alone she was 
certain; assuring her, that where a young woman's expences exceeded her known 
expectations, those who were foremost to praise her elegance, would most fear 
to form any connection with her, and most despise or deride her in any calamity.

Camilla found no difficulty in promising the most exact observance of this 
instruction; her heart seemed in sackcloth and ashes, and she cared not in what 
manner her person should be arrayed.

Sir Hugh earnestly enjoined her not to fail to be at Cleves upon the arrival of 
Clermont, intimating that the nuptials would immediately take place.

She then sought Eugenia, whom she found with Dr. Orkborne, in a state of mind 
so perfectly calm and composed, as equally to surprise and rejoice her. She saw 
with pleasure that all Bellamy had inspired was the most artless compassion; 
for since his dismission had now positively been given, and Clermont was 
actually summoned, she devoted her thoughts solely to the approaching event, 
with the firm, though early wisdom which distinguished her character.

Indiana joined them; and, in a low voice, said to Camilla, 'Pray, cousin, do 
you know where Mr. Macdersey is? because I am sadly afraid he's dead.'

Camilla, surprised, desired to know why she had such an apprehension?

'Because he told me he'd shoot himself through the brains if I was cruel—and 
I am sure I had no great choice given me: for, between ourselves, Miss Margland 
gave all the answers for me, without once stopping to ask me what I should 
chuse. So if he has really done it, the fault is more her's than mine.'

She then said, that, just after Camilla's departure the preceding day, Mr. 
Macdersey arrived, and insisted upon seeing her, and speaking to Sir Hugh, as 
he was ordered into Kent, and could not go so far in suspence. Sir Hugh was not 
well enough to admit him; and Miss Margland, upon whom the office devolved, 
took upon her to give him a positive refusal; and though she went into the room 
while he was there, never once would let her make an answer for herself.

Miss Margland, she added, had frightened Sir Hugh into forbidding him the 
house, by comparing him with Mr. Bellamy; but Mr. Macdersey had frightened them 
all enough, in return, as he went away, by saying, that as soon as ever Sir 
Hugh was well, he would call him out, because of his sending him word down 
stairs not to come to Cleves any more, for he had been disturbed enough already 
by another Irish fortune-hunter, that came after another of his nieces; and he 
was the more sure Mr. Macdersey was one of them, because of his being a real 
Irishman, while Mr. Bellamy was only an Englishman. 'But don't you think now, 
cousin,' she continued, 'Miss Margland might as well have let me speak for 
myself?'

Camilla inquired if she was sorry for the rejection.

'N ... o,' she answered, with some hesitation; 'for Miss Margland says he's got 
no rent-roll; besides, I don't think he's so agreeable as Mr. Melmond; only Mr. 
Melmond's worth little or no fortune they say: for Miss Margland inquired about 
it, after Mr. Mandlebert behaved so. Else I can't say I thought Mr. Melmond 
disagreeable.'

Mrs. Arlbery now sent to hasten Camilla, who, in returning to the parlour, met 
Edgar. He had just gathered her intended excursion, and, sick at heart, had 
left the room. Camilla felt the consciousness of a guilty person at his sight; 
but he only slightly bowed; and coldly saying, 'I hope you will have much 
pleasure at Tunbridge,' went on to his own room.

And there, replete with resentment for the whole of her late conduct, he again 
blessed Dr. Marchmont for his preservation from her toils; and, concluding the 
excursion was for the sake of the Major, whose regiment he knew to be just 
ordered into Kent, he centered every former hope in the one single wish that he 
might never see her more.

Camilla, shocked by such obvious displeasure, quitted Cleves with still 
increasing sadness; and Mrs. Arlbery would heartily have repented her 
invitation, but for her dependance upon Sir Sedley Clarendel.

At Etherington they stopt, that Camilla might prepare her package for 
Tunbridge. Mrs. Arlbery would not alight.

While Camilla, with a maid-servant, was examining her drawers, the chamber door 
was opened by Lionel, for whom she had just inquired, and who, telling her he 
wanted to speak to her in private, turned the maid out of the room.

Camilla begged him to be quick, as Mrs. Arlbery was waiting.

'Why then, my dear little girl,' cried he, 'the chief substance of the matter 
is neither more nor less than this: I want a little money.'

'My dear brother,' said Camilla, pleasure again kindling in her eyes as she 
opened her pocket-book, 'you could never have applied to me so opportunely. I 
have just got twenty pounds, and I do not want twenty shillings. Take it, I 
beseech you, any part, or all.'

Lionel paused and seemed half choaked. 'Camilla,' he cried presently, 'you are 
an excellent girl. If you were as old and ugly as Miss Margland, I really 
believe I should think you young and pretty. But this sum is nothing. A drop of 
water to the ocean.'

Camilla now, drawing back, disappointed and displeased, asked how it was 
possible he should want more.

'More, my dear child? why I want two or three cool hundred.'

'Two or three hundred?' repeated she, amazed.

'Nay, nay, don't be frightened. My uncle will give you two or three thousand, 
you know that. And I really want the money. It's no joke, I assure you. It's a 
case of real distress.'

'Distress? impossible! what distress can you have to so prodigious an amount?'

'Prodigious! poor little innocent! dost think two or three hundred prodigious?'

'And what is become of the large sums extorted from my uncle Relvil?'

'O that was for quite another thing. That was for debts. That's gone and over. 
This is for a perfectly different purpose.'

'And will nothing—O Lionel!—nothing touch you? My poor mother's quitting 
England ... her separation from my father and her family ... my uncle Relvil's 
severe attack ... will nothing move you to more thoughtful, more praise-worthy 
conduct?'

'Camilla, no preaching! I might as well cast myself upon the old ones at once. 
I come to you in preference, on purpose to avoid sermonising. However, for your 
satisfaction, and to spur you to serve me, I can assure you I have avoided all 
new debts since the last little deposit of the poor sick hypochondriac miser, 
who is pining away at the loss of a few guineas, that he had neither spirit nor 
health to have spent for himself.'

'Is this your reasoning, your repentance, Lionel, upon such a catastrophe?'

'My dear girl, I am heartily concerned at the whole business, only, as it's 
over, I don't like talking of it. This is the last scrape I shall ever be in 
while I live. But if you won't help me, I am undone. You know your influence 
with my uncle. Do, there's a dear girl, use it for your brother! I have not a 
dependance in the world, now, but upon you!'

'Certainly I will do whatever I can for you,' said she, sighing; 'but indeed, 
my dear Lionel, your manner of going on makes my very heart ache! However, let 
this twenty pounds be in part, and tell me your very smallest calculation for 
what must be added?'

'Two hundred. A farthing less will be of no use; and three will be of thrice 
the service. But mind!... you must not say it's for me!'

'How, then, can I ask for it?'

'O, vamp up some dismal ditty.'

'No, Lionel!' exclaimed she, turning away from him; 'you propose what you know 
to be impracticable.'

'Well, then, if you must needs say it's for me, tell him he must not for his 
life own it to the old ones.'

'In the same breath, must I beg and command?'

'O, I always make that my bargain. I should else be put into the lecture room, 
and not let loose again till I was made a milk-sop. They'd talk me so into the 
vapours, I should not be able to act like a man for a month to come.'

'A man, Lionel?'

'Yes, a man of the world, my dear; a knowing one.'

Mrs. Arlbery now sent to hasten her, and he extorted a promise that she would 
go to Cleves the next morning, and procure a draft for the money, if possible, 
to be ready for his calling at the Grove in the afternoon.

She felt this more deeply than she had time or courage to own to Lionel, but 
her increased melancholy was all imputed to reflections concerning Mandlebert 
by Mrs. Arlbery.

That lady lent her chaise the next morning, with her usual promptitude of good 
humour, and Camilla went to Cleves, with a reluctance that never before 
accompanied her desire to oblige.

Her visit was received most kindly by all the family, as merely an additional 
leave taking; in which light, though she was too sincere to place it, she 
suffered it to pass. Having no chance of being alone with her uncle by 
accident, she was forced to beg him, in a whisper, to request a tête-à-tête 
with her: and she then, covered with all the confusion of a partner in his 
extravagance, made the petition of Lionel.

Sir Hugh seemed much surprised, but protested he would rather part with his 
coat and waistcoat than refuse anything to Camilla. He gave her instantly a 
draft upon his banker for two hundred pounds; but added, he should take it very 
kind of her, if she would beg Lionel to ask him for no more this year, as he 
was really so hard run, he should not else be able to make proper preparations 
for the wedding, till his next rents became due.

Camilla was now surprised in her turn; and Sir Hugh then confessed, that, 
between presents and petitions, his nephew had had no less than five hundred 
pounds from him the preceding year, unknown to his parents; and that for this 
year, the sum she requested made the seventh hundred; without the least account 
for what purpose it was given.

Camilla now heartily repented being a partner in a business so rapacious, so 
unjustifiable, and so mysterious; but, kindly interrupting her apology, 'Don't 
be concerned, my dear,' he cried, 'for there's no help for these things; though 
what the young boys do with all their money now-a-days, is odd enough, being 
what I can't make out. However, he'll soon be wiser, so we must not be too 
severe with him; though I told him, the last time, I had rather he would not 
ask me so often; which was being almost too sharp, I'm afraid, considering his 
youngness; for one can't expect him to be an old man at once.'

Camilla gave voluntarily her word no such application should find her its 
ambassadress again: and though he would have dispensed with the promise, she 
made it the more readily as a guard against her own facility.

'At least,' cried the baronet, 'say nothing to my poor brother, and more 
especially to your mother; it being but vexatious to such good parents to hear 
of such idleness, not knowing what to think of it; for it is a great secret, he 
says, what he does with it all; for which reason one can't expect him to tell 
it. My poor brother, to be sure, had rather he should be studying hic, hæc, 
hoc; but, Lord help him! I believe he knows no more of that than I do myself; 
and I never could make out much meaning of it, any further than it's being 
Latin; though I suppose, at the time, Dr. Orkborne might explain it to me, 
taking it for granted he did what was right.'

Camilla was most willing to agree to concealing from her parents what she knew 
must so painfully afflict them, though she determined to assume sufficient 
courage to expostulate most seriously with her brother, against whom she felt 
sensations of the most painful anger.

Again she now took leave; but upon re-entering the parlour, found Edgar there 
alone.

Involuntarily she was retiring; but the counsel of her father recurring to her, 
she compelled herself to advance, and say, 'How good you have been to Eugenia! 
how greatly are we all indebted for your kind vigilance and exertion!'

Edgar, who was reading, and knew not she was in the house, was surprised, both 
by her sight and her address, out of all his resolutions; and, with a softness 
of voice he meant evermore to deny himself, answered, 'To me? can any of the 
Tyrold family talk of being indebted to me?—my own obligations to all, to 
every individual of that name, have been the pride, have been—hitherto—the 
happiness of my life!—'

The word 'hitherto,' which had escaped, affected him: he stopt, recollected 
himself, and presently, more drily added, 'Those obligations would be still 
much increased, if I might flatter myself that one of that race, to whom I have 
ventured to play the officious part of a brother, could forget those lectures, 
she can else, I fear, with difficulty pardon.'

'You have found me unworthy your counsel,' answered Camilla, gravely, and 
looking down; 'you have therefore concluded I resent it: but we are not always 
completely wrong, even when wide from being right. I have not been culpable of 
quite so much folly as not to feel what I have owed to your good offices; nor 
am I now guilty of the injustice to blame their being withdrawn. You do surely 
what is wisest, though not—perhaps—what is kindest.'

To these last words she forced a smile; and, wishing him good morning, hurried 
away.

Amazed past expression, and touched to the soul, he remained, a few instants, 
immoveable; then, resolving to follow her, and almost resolving to throw 
himself at her feet, he opened the door she had shut after her: he saw her 
still in the hall, but she was in the arms of her father and sisters, who had 
all descended, upon hearing she had left Sir Hugh, and of whom she was now 
taking leave.

Upon his appearance, she said she could no longer keep the carriage; but, as 
she hastened from the hall, he saw that her eyes were swimming in tears.

Her father saw it too, with less surprise, but more pain. He knew her short and 
voluntary absence from her friends could not excite them: his heart ached with 
paternal concern for her; and, motioning everybody else to remain in the hall, 
he walked with her to the carriage himself, saying, in a low voice, as he put 
her in, 'Be of better courage, my dearest child. Endeavour to take pleasure 
where you are going—and to forget what you are leaving: and, if you wish to 
feel or to give contentment upon earth, remember always, you must seek to make 
circumstance contribute to happiness, not happiness subservient to 
circumstance.'

Camilla, bathing his hand with her tears, promised this maxim should never quit 
her mind till they met again.

She then drove off.

'Yes,' she cried, 'I must indeed study it; Edgar cares no more what becomes of 
me! resentment next to antipathy has taken place of his friendship and esteem!'

She wrote down in her pocket-book the last words of her father; she resolved to 
read them daily, and to make them the current lesson of her future and 
disappointed life.

Lionel, too impatient to wait for the afternoon, was already at the Grove, and 
handed her from the chaise. But, stopping her in the portico, 'Well,' he cried, 
'where's my draft?'

'Before I give it you,' said she, seriously, and walking from the servants, 'I 
must entreat to speak a few words to you.'

'You have really got it, then?' cried he, in a rapture; 'you are a charming 
girl! the most charming girl I know in the world! I won't take your poor twenty 
pounds: I would not touch it for the world. But come, where's the draft? Is it 
for the two or the three?'

'For the two; and surely, my dear Lionel—'

'For the two? O, plague take it!—only for the two?—And when will you get me 
the odd third?'

'O brother! O Lionel! what a question! Will you make me repent, instead of 
rejoice, in the pleasure I have to assist you?'

'Why, when he was about it, why could he not as well come down like a gentleman 
at once? I am sure I always behaved very handsomely to him.'

'How do you mean?'

'Why, I never frightened him; never put him beside his poor wits, like t'other 
poor nuncle. I don't remember I ever did him an ill turn in my life, except 
wanting Dr. Pothook, there, to flog him a little for not learning his book. It 
would have been a rare sight if he had!—Don't you think so?'

'Rare, indeed, I hope!'

'Why, now, what could he have done, if the Doctor had really performed it? He 
could not in justice have found fault, when he put himself to school to him. 
But he'd have felt a little queer. Don't you think he would?'

'You only want to make me laugh, to prevent my speaking to the purpose; but I 
am not disposed to laugh; and therefore—'

'O, if you are not disposed to laugh, you are no company for me. Give me my 
draft, therefore.'

'If you will not hear, I hope, at least, Lionel, you will think; and that may 
be much more efficacious. Shall I put up the twenty? I really do not want it. 
And it is all, all, all I can ever procure you! Remember that!'

'What?—all?—this all?—what, not even the other little mean hundred?'

'No, my dear brother! I have promised my uncle no further application—'

'Why what a stingy, fusty old codger, to draw such a promise from you!'

'Hold, hold, Lionel! I cannot endure to hear you speak in such a manner of such 
an uncle! the best, the most benevolent, the most indulgent—'

'Lord, child, don't be so precise and old maidish. Don't you know it's a relief 
to a man's mind to swear, and say a few cutting things when he's in a passion? 
when all the time he would no more do harm to the people he swears at, than you 
would, that mince out all your words as if you were talking treason, and 
thought every man a spy that heard you. Besides, how is a man the worse for a 
little friendly curse or two, provided he does not hear it? It's a very 
innocent refreshment to a man's mind, my dear; only you know nothing of the 
world.'

Mrs. Arlbery now approaching, he hastily took the draft, and, after a little 
hesitation, the twenty pounds, telling her, if she would not ask for him, she 
must ask for herself, and that he felt no compunction, as he was certain she 
might draw upon her uncle for every guinea he was worth.

He then heartily embraced her; said she was the best girl in the world, when 
she did not mount the pulpit, and rode off.

Camilla felt no concern at the loss of her twenty pounds: lowered and unhappy, 
she was rather glad than sorry that her means for being abroad were diminished, 
and that to keep her own room would soon be most convenient.

The next day was fixed for the journey.

BOOK VI
