
A Walk by Moonlight

Mrs. Arlbery and Camilla set off in the coach of Mr. Dennel, widower of a 
deceased sister of the husband of Mrs. Arlbery, whom she was induced to admit 
of the party that he might aid in bearing the expenses, as she could not, from 
some family considerations, refuse taking her niece into her coterie. Sir 
Sedley Clarendel drove his own phaeton; but instead of joining them, according 
to the condition which occasioned the treaty, cantered away his ponies from the 
very first stage, and left word, where he changed horses, that he should 
proceed to the hotel upon the Pantiles.

Mrs. Arlbery was nearly provoked to return to the Grove. With Mr. Dennel she 
did not think it worth while to converse; her niece she regarded as almost an 
idiot; and Camilla was so spiritless, that, had not Sir Sedley acceded to her 
plan, this was the last period in which she would have chosen her for a 
companion.

They travelled very quietly to within a few miles of Tunbridge, when an 
accident happened to one of the wheels of the carriage, that the coachman said 
would take some hours to repair. They were drawn on, with difficulty, to a 
small inn upon the road, whence they were obliged to send a man and horse to 
Tunbridge for chaises.

As they were destined, now, to spend some time in this place, Mrs. Arlbery 
retired to write letters, and Mr. Dennel to read newspapers; and, invited by a 
bright moon, Camilla and Miss Dennel wandered from a little garden to an 
adjoining meadow, which conducted them to a lane, rendered so beautiful by the 
strong masses of shade with which the trees intercepted the resplendent 
whiteness of the moon, that they walked on, catching fresh openings with fresh 
pleasure, till the feet of Miss Dennel grew as weary with the length of the 
way, unbroken by any company, as the ears of Camilla with her incessant 
prattling, unaided by any idea. Miss Dennel proposed to sit down, and, while 
relieving herself by a fit of yawning and stretching, Camilla strolled a little 
further in search of a safe and dry spot.

Miss Dennel, following in a moment, on tiptoe, and trembling, whispered that 
she was sure she heard a voice. Camilla, with a smile, asked if only themselves 
were privileged to enjoy so sweet a night? 'Hush!' cried she, 'hush! I hear it 
again!' They listened; and, in a minute, a soft plaintive tone reached their 
ears, too distant to be articulate, but undoubtedly female.

'I dare say it's a robber!' exclaimed Miss Dennel shaking; 'If you don't run 
back, I shall die!'

Camilla assured her, from the gentleness of the sound, she must be mistaken; 
and pressed her to advance a few steps further, in case it should be anybody 
ill.

'But you know,' said Miss Dennel, speaking low, 'people say that sometimes 
there are noises in the air, without its being anybody? Suppose it should be 
that?'

Still, though almost imperceptibly, Camilla drew her on, till, again listening, 
they distinctly heard the words, 'My lovely friend.'

'La! how pretty!' said Miss Dennel; 'let's go a little nearer.'

They advanced, and presently, again stopping heard, 'Could pity pour balm into 
my woes, how sweetly would they be alleviated by your's, my lovely friend?'

Miss Dennel now looked enchanted, and eagerly led the way herself.

In a few minutes, arriving at the end of the lane, which opened upon a wild and 
romantic common, they caught a glimpse of a figure in white.

Miss Dennel turned pale. 'Dear!' cried she, in the lowest whisper, 'what is it?'

'A lady,' answered Camilla, equally cautious not to be heard, though totally 
without alarm.

'Are you sure of that?' said Miss Dennel, shrinking back, and pulling her 
companion to accompany her.

'Do you think it's a ghost?' cried Camilla, unresisting the retreat, yet 
walking backwards to keep the form in sight.

'Fie! how can you talk so shocking? all in the dark so, except only for the 
moon?'

'Your's, my lovely friend!' was now again pronounced in the tenderest accent.

'She's talking to herself!' exclaimed Miss Dennel; 'Lord, how frightful!' and 
she clung close to Camilla, who, mounting a little hillock of stones, presently 
perceived that the lady was reading a letter.

Miss Dennel, tranquillised by hearing this, was again content to stop, when 
their ears were suddenly struck by a piercing shriek.

'O Lord! we shall be murdered!' cried she, screaming still louder herself.

They both ran back some paces down the lane, Camilla determining to send 
somebody from the inn to inquire what all this meant: but presently, through an 
opening in the common, they perceived the form in white darting forwards, with 
an air wild and terrified. Camilla stopt, struck with compassion and curiosity 
at once; Miss Dennel could not quit her, but after the first glance, hid her 
face, faintly articulating, 'O, don't let it see us! don't let it see us! I am 
sure it's nothing natural! I dare say it's somebody walking!'

The next instant, they perceived a man, looking earnestly around, as if to 
discover who had echoed the scream; the place they occupied was in the shade, 
and he did not observe them. He soon rushed hastily on, and seized the white 
garment of the flying figure, which appeared, both by its dress and form, to be 
an elegant female. She clasped her hands in supplication, cast up her eyes 
towards heaven, and again shrieked aloud.

Camilla, who possessed that fine internal power of the thinking and feeling 
mind to adopt courage for terror, where any eminent service may be the result 
of immediate exertion, was preparing to spring to her relief; while Miss 
Dennel, in extreme agony holding her, murmured out, 'Let's run away! let's run 
away! she's going to be murdered!' when they saw the man prostrate himself at 
the lady's feet, in the humblest subjection.

Camilla stopt her flight; and Miss Dennel, appeased, called out; 'La! his 
kneeling! how pretty it looks! I dare say it's a lover. How I wish one could 
hear what he says!'

An exclamation, however, from the lady, uttered in a tone of mingled affright 
and disgust, of 'leave me! leave me!' was again the signal to Miss Dennel of 
retreat, but of Camilla to advance.

The rustling of the leaves, caused by her attempt to make way through the 
breach, caught the ears of the suppliant, who hastily arose; while the lady 
folded her arms across her breast, and seemed ejaculating the most fervent 
thanks for this relief.

Camilla now forced a passage through the hedge, and the lady, as she saw her 
approach, called out, in a voice the most touching, 'Surely 'tis some pitying 
Angel, mercifully come to my rescue!'

The pursuer drew back, and Camilla, in the gentlest words, besought the lady to 
accompany her to the friends she had just left, who would be happy to protect 
her.

She gratefully accepted the proposal, and Camilla then ventured to look round, 
to see if the object of this alarm had retreated: but, with an astonishment 
that almost confounded her, she perceived him, a few yards off, taking a pinch 
of snuff, and humming an opera air.

The lady, then, snatching up her letter, which had fallen to the ground, 
touched it with her lips, and carefully folding, put it into her bosom, 
tenderly ejaculating, 'I have preserved thee!... O from what danger! what 
violation!'

Then pressing the hand of Camilla, 'You have saved me,' she cried, 'from the 
calamity of losing what is more dear than I have words to express! Take me but 
where I may be shielded from that wretch, and what shall I not owe to you?'

The moon now shining full upon her face, Camilla saw seated on it youth, 
sensibility, and beauty. Her pleasure, involuntarily rather than rationally, 
was redoubled that she had proved serviceable to her, as, in equal proportion, 
was her abhorrence of the man who had caused the disturbance.

The three females were now proceeding, when the offender, with a careless air, 
and yet more careless bow, advancing towards them, negligently said, 'Shall I 
have the honour to see you safe home, ladies?'

Camilla felt indignant; Miss Dennel again screamed; and the stranger, with a 
look of horror and disgust, said; 'Persecute me no more!'

'O hang it! O curse it!' cried he, swinging his cane to and fro, 'don't be 
serious. I only meant to frighten you about the letter.'

The lady deigned no answer, but murmured to herself 'that letter is more 
precious to me than life or light!'

They now walked on; and, when they entered the lane, they had the pleasure to 
observe they were not pursued. She then said to Camilla, 'You must be surprised 
to see any one out, and unprotected, at this late hour; but I had employed 
myself, unthinkingly, in reading some letters from a dear and absent friend, 
and forgot the quick passage of time.'

A man in a livery now appearing at some distance, she hastily summoned him, and 
demanded where was the carriage?

In the road, he answered, where she had left it, at the end of the lane.

She then took the hand of Camilla, and with a smile of the utmost softness 
said, 'When the shock I have suffered is a little over, I must surely cease to 
lament I have sustained it, since it has brought to me such sweet succour. 
Where may I find you tomorrow, to repeat my thanks?'

Camilla answered, 'she was going to Tunbridge immediately, but knew not yet 
where she should lodge.'

'Tunbridge!' she repeated; I am there myself; I shall easily find you out 
tomorrow morning, for I shall know no rest till I have seen you again.'

She then asked her name, and, with the most touching acknowledgments, took 
leave.

Camilla recounted her adventure to Mrs. Arlbery, with an animated description 
of the fair Incognita, and with the most heart-felt delight of having, though 
but accidentally, proved of service to her. Mrs. Arlbery laughed heartily at 
the recital, assuring her she doubted not but she had made acquaintance with 
some dangerous fair one, who was playing upon her inexperience, and utterly 
unfit to be known to her. Camilla warmly vindicated her innocence, from the 
whole of her appearance, as well as from the impossibility of her knowing that 
her scream could be heard: yet was perplexed how to account for her not naming 
herself, and for the mystery of the carriage and servant in waiting so far off. 
These latter she concluded to belong to her father, as she looked too young to 
have any sort of establishment of her own.

'What I don't understand in the matter is, that there reading of letters by the 
light of the moon;' said Mr. Dennel. 'Where's the necessity of doing that, for 
a person that can afford to keep her own coach and servants?'

Mr. Dennel was a man as unfavoured by nature as he was uncultivated by art. He 
had been accepted as a husband by the sister of Mr. Arlbery, merely on account 
of a large fortune, which he had acquired in business. The marriage, like most 
others made upon such terms, was as little happy in its progression as 
honourable in its commencement; and Miss Dennel, born and educated amidst 
domestic dissention, which robbed her of all will of her own, by the constant 
denial of one parent to what was accorded by the other, possessed too little 
reflexion to benefit by observing the misery of an alliance not mentally 
assorted; and grew up with no other desire but to enter the state herself, from 
an ardent impatience to shake off the slavery she experienced in singleness. 
The recent death of her mother had given her, indeed, somewhat more liberty; 
but she had not sufficient sense to endure any restraint, and languished for 
the complete power which she imagined a house and servants of her own would 
afford.

When they arrived at the hotel, in Tunbridge, Mrs. Arlbery heard, with some 
indignation, that Sir Sedley Clarendel was gone to the rooms, without 
demonstrating, by any sort of inquiry, the smallest solicitude at her 
non-appearance.
