
Knowle

The last words of Camilla to Mandlebert, in quitting Cleves, and the tears with 
which he saw her eyes overflowing, had annihilated all his resentment, and left 
him no wish but to serve her. Her distinction between what was wisest and what 
was kindest, had penetrated him to the quick. To be thought capable of severity 
towards so sweet a young creature, the daughter of his guardian, his juvenile 
companion, and earliest favourite, made him detestable in his own eyes. He 
languished to follow her, to apologise for what had hurt her, and to vow to her 
a fair and disinterested friendship for the rest of his life: and he only 
forced himself, from decency, to stay out his promised week with the baronet, 
before he set out for Tunbridge.

Upon his arrival, which was late, he went immediately to the Rooms; but he only 
saw her name in the books, and learnt, upon inquiring for Mrs. Arlbery, that 
she and her party were already retired.

Glad to find her so sober in hours, he went to the hotel, meaning quietly to 
read till bed-time, and to call upon her the next morning.

In a few moments, a voice struck his ear that effectually interrupted his 
studies. It was the voice of Camilla. Camilla at an hotel at past eleven 
o'clock! He knew she did not lodge there; he had seen, in the books, the 
direction of Mrs. Arlbery at Mount Pleasant. Mrs. Arlbery's voice he also 
distinguished, Sir Sedley Clarendel's, General Kinsale's, and, least of all 
welcome, ... the Major's.

Perhaps, however, some lady, some intimate friend of Mrs. Arlbery, was just 
arrived, and had made them spend the evening there. He rang for his man, and 
bid him inquire who had taken the next room, ... and learnt it was Sir Sedley 
Clarendel.

To visit a young man at an hotel; rich, handsome, and splendid; and with a 
chaperon so far from past her prime, so elegant, so coquetish, so alluring, and 
still so pretty; and to meet there a flashy Officer, her open pursuer and 
avowed admirer—'Tis true, he had concluded, Tunbridge and the Major were one; 
but not thus, not with such glaring impropriety; his love, he told himself, was 
past; but his esteem was still susceptible, and now grievously wounded.

To read was impossible. To hold his watch in his hand, and count the minutes 
she still stayed, was all to which his faculties were equal. No words 
distinctly reached him; that the conversation was lively, the tone of every 
voice announced, but when that of Camilla struck him by its laughter, the depth 
of his concern drew from him a sigh that was heard into the next apartment.

Of this, with infinite vexation, he was himself aware, from the sudden silence 
and pause of all discourse which ensued. Ashamed both of what he felt and what 
he betrayed, he grew more upon his guard, and hoped it might never be known to 
whom the room belonged.

When, however, as they were retiring, a scream reached his ear, though he knew 
it was not the voice of Camilla, he could not command himself, and rushed forth 
with a light; but the lady who screamed was as little noticed as thought of: 
the Major was holding the hand of Camilla, and his eye could take in no more: 
he saw not even that Mrs. Arlbery was there; and when roused by her question, 
all voice was denied him for answer; he stood motionless even after they had 
descended the stairs, till the steps of the General and the Major, retiring to 
their chambers, brought to him some recollection, and enabled him to retreat.

Fully now, as well as cruelly convinced, of the unabated force of his unhappy 
passion, he spent the night in extreme wretchedness; and all that was not 
swallowed up in repining and regret, was devoted to ruminate upon what possible 
means he could suggest, to restore to himself the tranquillity of indifference.

The confusion of Camilla persuaded him she thought she was acting wrong; but 
whether from disapprobation of the character of the Major, or from any 
pecuniary obstacles to their union, he could not devise. To assist the marriage 
according to his former plan, would best, he still believed, sooth his internal 
sufferings, if once he could fancy the Major at all worthy of such a wife. But 
Camilla, with all her inconsistencies, he thought a treasure unequalled: and to 
contribute to bestow her on a man who, probably, only prized her for her 
beauty, he now persuaded himself would rather be culpable than generous.

Upon the whole, therefore, he could resolve only upon a complete change of his 
last system; to seek, instead of avoiding her; to familiarise himself with her 
faults, till he ceased to doat upon her virtues; to discover if her 
difficulties were mental or worldly; to enforce them if the first, and ... 
whatever it might cost him—to invalidate them if the last.

This plan, the only one he could form, abated his misery. It reconciled him to 
residing where Camilla resided, it was easy to him, therefore, to conclude it 
the least objectionable.

Camilla, meanwhile, in her way to Mount Pleasant, spoke not a syllable. Dismay 
that Edgar should have seen her so situated, while in ignorance how it had 
happened, made an uneasiness the most terrible combat the perplexed pleasure, 
that lightened, yet palpitated in her bosom, from the view of Edgar at 
Tunbridge, and from the sigh which had reached her ears. Yet, was it for her he 
sighed? was it not, rather, from some secret inquietude, in which she was 
wholly uninterested, and might never know? Still, however, he was at Tunbridge; 
still, therefore, she might hope something relative to herself induced his 
coming; and she determined, with respect to her own behaviour, to observe the 
injunctions of her father, whose letter she would regularly read every morning.

Mrs. Arlbery, also, spoke not; the unexpected sight of Mandlebert occupied all 
her thoughts; yet, though his confusion was suspicious, she could not, 
ultimately, believe he loved Camilla, as she could suggest no possible 
impediment to his proclaiming any regard he entertained. His sigh she imagined 
as likely to be mere lassitude as love; and supposed, that having long 
discovered the partiality of Camilla, his vanity had been confounded by the 
devoirs of the Major.

Miss Dennel, therefore, was the only one whose voice was heard during the ride; 
for now completely awaked, she talked without cessation of the fright she had 
endured. 'La, I thought,' cried she, 'when I tumbled down, somebody threw me 
down on purpose, and was going to kill me! dear me! I thought I should have 
died! And then I thought it was a robber; and then I thought that candle that 
come was a ghost! O la! I never was so frightened in my life!'

The next morning they went, as usual, to the Pantiles, and Mrs. Arlbery took 
her seat in the bookseller's shop, where the usual beaux were encountered; and 
where, presently, Edgar entering, addressed to her some discourse, and made 
some general inquiries after the health of Camilla.

It was a cruel drawback to her hopes to see him first thus in public: but the 
manner of Mrs. Arlbery at the hotel, he had thought repulsive; he had observed 
that she seemed offended with him since the rencounter at the breakfast given 
for Miss Dennel; and he now wished for some encouragement for renewing his 
rights to the acquaintance.

Sir Sedley, though with the assistance of a stick he had reached the library, 
was not sufficiently at his ease to again mount his horse; a carriage 
expedition was therefore agitating for the morning, and to see Knowle being 
fixed upon, equipages and horses were ordered.

While they waited their arrival. Lady Alithea Selmore, and a very shewy train 
of ladies and gentlemen, came into the library. Sir Sedley, losing the easy, 
natural manner which had just so much pleased Camilla, resumed his affectation, 
indolence, and inattention, and flung himself back in his chair, without 
finishing a speech he had begun, or listening to an inquiry why he stopt short. 
His friends, Lord Newford and Sir Theophilus Jarard, shuffled up to her 
ladyship; and Sir Sedley, muttering to himself life would not be life without 
being introduced to her, got up, and seizing Lord Newford by the shoulder, 
whispered what he called the height of his ambition, and was presented without 
delay.

He then entered into a little abrupt, half articulated conversation with Lady 
Alithea, who, by a certain toss of the chin, a short and half scornful laugh, 
and a supercilious dropping of the eye, gave to every sentence she uttered the 
air of a bon mot; and after each, as regularly stopt for some testimony of 
admiration, as a favourite actress in some scene in which every speech is 
applauded. What she said, indeed, had no other mark than what this manner gave 
to it; for it was neither good nor bad, wise nor foolish, sprightly nor dull. 
It was what, if naturally spoken, would have passed, as it deserved, without 
censure or praise. This manner, however, prevailed not only upon her auditors, 
but herself, to believe that something of wit, of finesse, of peculiarity, 
accompanied her every phrase. Thought, properly speaking, there was none in any 
thing she pronounced: her speeches were all replies, which her admirers 
dignified by the name of repartees, and which mechanically and regularly flowed 
from some word, not idea, that preceded.

Mrs. Arlbery, having listened some time, turned entirely away, though with less 
contempt of her ladyship than of her hearers. Her own auditors, however, except 
the faithful General, had all deserted her. Even the Major, curious to attend 
to a lady of some celebrity, had quitted the chair of Camilla; and Edgar 
himself, imagining, from this universal devotion, there was something well 
worth an audience, had joined the group.

'We are terribly in the back ground, General!' cried Mrs. Arlbery, in a low 
voice. 'What must be done to save our reputations?'

The General, laughing, said, he feared they were lost irretrievably; but added 
that he preferred defeat with her, to victory without her.

'Your gallantry, my dear General,' cried she, with a sudden air of glee, 'shall 
be rewarded! Follow me close, and you shall see the fortune of the day 
reversed.'

Rising then, she advanced softly, and with an air of respect, towards the 
party, and fixing herself just opposite to Lady Alithea, with looks of the most 
profound attention, stood still, as if in admiring expectation.

Lady Alithea, who had regarded this approach as an intrusion that strongly 
manifested ignorance of high life, thought much better of it when she remarked 
the almost veneration of her air. She deemed it, however, wholly beneath her to 
speak when thus attended to; till, observing the patient admiration with which 
even a single word seemed to be hoped for, she began to pardon what appeared to 
be a mere tribute to her fame; and upon Sir Theophilus Jarard's saying, 'I 
don't think we have had such a bore of a season as this, these five years;' 
could not refuse herself the pleasure of replying: 'I did not imagine, Sir 
Theophilus, you were already able to count by lustres.'

Her own air of complacency announced the happiness of this answer. The company, 
as usual, took the hint, and approbation was buzzed around her. Lord Newford 
gave a loud laugh, without the least conception why; and Sir Theophilus, after 
paying the same compliment, wished, as it concerned himself, to know what had 
been said; and glided to the other end of the shop, to look for the word lustre 
in Entick's dictionary.

But this triumph was even less than momentary; Mrs. Arlbery, gently raising her 
shoulders with her head, indulged herself in a smile that favoured yet more of 
pity than derision; and, with a hasty glance at the General, that spoke an 
eagerness to compare notes with him, hurried out of the shop; her eyes dropt, 
as if fearful to trust her countenance to an instant's investigation.

Lady Alithea felt herself blush. The confusion was painful and unusual to her. 
She drew her glove off and on; she dabbed a highly scented pocket handkerchief 
repeatedly to her nose; she wondered what it was o'clock; took her watch in her 
hand, without recollecting to examine it; and then wondered if it would rain, 
though not a cloud was to be discerned in the sky.

To see her thus completely disconcerted, gave a weight to the mischievous 
malice of Mrs. Arlbery, of which the smallest presence of mind would have 
robbed it. Her admirers, one by one, dwindled away, with lessened esteem for 
her talents; and, finding herself presently alone in the shop with Sir 
Theophilus Jarard, she said, 'Pray, Sir Theophilus, do you know anything of 
that queer woman?'

The words queer woman were guides sufficient to Sir Theophilus, who answered, 
'No! I have seen her, somewhere, by accident, but—she is quite out of our 
line.'

This reply was a sensible gratification to Lady Alithea, who, having heard her 
warmly admired by Lord O'Lerney, had been the more susceptible to her ridicule. 
Rudeness she could have despised without emotion; but contempt had something in 
it of insolence; a commodity she held herself born to dispense, not receive.

When Mrs. Arlbery arrived, laughing, at the bottom of the Pantiles, she found 
Edgar making inquiries of the time and manner of drinking the mineral water.

Camilla heard him, also, and with deep apprehensions for his health. He did not 
however look ill; and a second sadness, not less deep, ensued, that she could 
now retain no hope of being herself his inducement to this journey.

But egotism was no part of her composition; when she saw, therefore, the next 
minute, Sir Sedley Clarendel advance limping, and heard him ask if his phaeton 
were ready, she approached him, saying, 'Will you venture, Sir Sedley, in your 
phaeton?'

'There's no sort of reason why not,' answered he, sensibly flattered; 'yet I 
had certainly rather go as you go!'

'Then that,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'must be in Dennel's coach, with him and my 
little niece here: and then I'll drive the General in your phaeton.'

'Agreed!' cried Sir Sedley, seating himself on one of the forms; and then, 
taking from a paper some tickets, added; 'I want a few guineas.'

'So do I!' exclaimed Mrs. Arlbery; 'do you know where such sort of things are 
to be met with?'

'Lady Alithea Selmore has promised to disperse some twenty tickets for the 
master of the ceremonies' ball, and she commands me to help. How many shall I 
give you?'

'Ask Mr. Dennel,' answered she negligently; 'he's the only paymaster just now.'

Mr. Dennel turned round, and was going to walk away; but Mrs. Arlbery, taking 
him by the arm, said: 'My good friend, how many tickets shall Sir Sedley give 
you?'

'Me!—none at all.'

'O fie! every body goes to the master of the ceremonies' ball. Come, you shall 
have six. You can't possibly take less.'

'Six! What should I do with them?'

'Why, you and your daughter will use two, and four you must give away.'

'What for?'

'Was ever such a question? To do what's proper and right, and handsome and 
gallant.'

'O, as to all that, it's what I don't understand. It's out of my way.'

He would then have made off; but Mrs. Arlbery, piqued to succeed, held him 
fast, and said: 'Come, if you'll be good, I'll be good too, and you shall have 
a plain joint of meat at the bottom of the table every day for a fortnight.'

Mr. Dennel softened a little here into something like a smile; and drew two 
guineas from his purse; but more there was no obtaining.

'Come,' cried Sir Sedley, 'you have canvassed well so far. Now for your fair 
self.'

'You are a shocking creature!' cried she; 'don't you know I am turned miser?'

Yet she gave her guinea.

'But the fair Tyrold does not also, I trust, assume that character?'

Camilla had felt very uneasy during this contest; and now, colouring, said she 
did not mean to go to the ball.

'Can you ever expect, then,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'to have a partner at any 
other? You don't know the rules of these places. The master of the ceremonies 
is always a gentleman, and every body is eager to shew him every possible 
respect.'

Camilla was now still more distressed; and stammered out, that she believed the 
fewer balls she went to, the better her father would be pleased.

'Your father, my dear, is a very wise man, and a very good man, and a very 
excellent preacher: but what does he know of Tunbridge Wells? Certainly not so 
much as my dairy maid, for she has heard John talk of them; but as to your 
father, depend upon it, the sole knowledge he has ever obtained, is from some 
treatise upon its mineral waters; which, very possibly, he can analyse as well 
as a physician: but for the regulation of a country dance, be assured he will 
do much better to make you over to Sir Sedley, or to me.'

Camilla laughed faintly, and feeling in her pocket to take out her pocket 
handkerchief, by way of something to do, Mrs. Arlbery concluded she was seeking 
her purse, and suddenly putting her hand upon her arm to prevent her, said, 
'No, no! if you don't wish to go, or choose to go, or approve of going, I 
cannot, in sober earnestness, see you compelled. Nothing is so detestable as 
forcing people to be amused. Come, now for Knowle.'

Sir Sedley was then putting up his tickets; but the Major, taking one of them 
out of his hand, presented it to Camilla, saying: 'Let the ladies take their 
tickets now, and settle with us afterwards.'

Camilla felt extremely provoked, yet not knowing how to resist, took the 
ticket; but, turning pointedly from the Major to Sir Sedley, said: 'I am your 
debtor, then, sir, a guinea—the smallest part, indeed, of what I owe you, 
though all I can pay!' And she then resolved to borrow that sum immediately of 
Mrs. Arlbery.

Sir Sedley began to think she grew handsomer every moment: and, contrary to his 
established and systematic inattention, upon hearing the sound of the 
carriages, conducted her himself to Mr. Dennel's coach, which he ascended after 
her.

Edgar, unable to withstand joining the party, had ordered his horse during the 
debate about the tickets.

Lords O'Lerney and Newford, and Sir Theophilus Jarard, and Major Cerwood, went 
also on horseback.

Sir Sedley made it his study to procure amusement for Camilla during the ride; 
and while he humoured alternately the loquacious folly of Miss Dennel, and the 
under-bred positiveness of her father, intermingled with both comic sarcasms 
against himself, and pointed annotations upon the times, that somewhat diverted 
her solicitude and perplexity.

She forgot them however, more naturally, in examining the noble antique 
mansion, pictures, and curiosities of Knowle; and in paying the tribute that 
taste must ever pay to the works exhibited there of Sir Joshua Reynolds.

The house viewed, they all proceeded to the park, where, enchanted with the 
noble old trees which venerably adorn it, they strolled delightedly, till they 
came within sight of an elegant white form, as far distant as their eyes could 
reach, reading under an oak.

Camilla instantly thought of her moonlight friend; but Sir Theophilus called 
out, 'Faith, there's the divine Berlinton!'

'Is there, faith?' exclaimed Lord Newford, suddenly rushing forward to satisfy 
himself if it were true.

Deeming this an ill-bred and unauthorised intrusion, they all stopt. The 
studious fair, profoundly absorbed by her book, did not hear his lordship's 
footsteps, till his coat rustled in her ears. Raising then her eyes, she 
screamed, dropt her book, and darting up, flew towards the wood, with a 
velocity far exceeding his own, though without seeming to know, or consider, 
whither her flight might lead her.

Camilla, certain now this was her new friend, felt an indignation the most 
lively against Lord Newford, and involuntarily sprung forward. It was evident 
the fair fugitive had perceived none of the party but him she sought to avoid; 
notwithstanding Lord Newford himself, when convinced who it was, ceased his 
pursuit, and seemed almost to find out there was such a sensation as shame; 
though by various antics, of swinging his cane, looking up in the air, shaking 
his pocket handkerchief, and sticking his arms a-kimbo, he thought it essential 
to his credit to disguise it.

Camilla had no chance to reach the flying beauty, but by calling to her to 
stop; which she did instantly at the sound of her voice, and, turning round 
with a look of rapture, ran into her arms.

The Major, whose devoirs to Camilla always sought, not avoided the public eye, 
eagerly pursued her. Edgar, cruelly envying a licence he concluded to result 
from his happy situation, looked on in silent amaze; but listened with no small 
attention to the remarks that now fell from Mrs. Arlbery, who said she was sure 
this must be the fair Incognita that Miss Tyrold had met with upon the road; 
and gave a lively relation of that adventure.

He could not hear without delight the benevolent courage thus manifested by 
Camilla, nor without terror the danger to which it might have exposed her. But 
Lord O'Lerney, with an air of extreme surprise, exclaimed: 'Is it possible Lord 
Newford could give any cause of alarm to Mrs. Berlinton?'

'Is she then, my lord, a woman of character?' cried Mrs. Arlbery.

'Untainted!' he answered solemnly; 'as spotless, I believe, as her beauty: and 
if you have seen her, you will allow that to be no small praise. She comes from 
a most respectable family in Wales, and has been married but a few months.'

'Married, my lord? my fair female Quixote assured me she was single.'

'No, poor thing! she was carried from the nursery to the altar, and, I fear, 
not very judiciously nor happily.'

'Dear!' cried Miss Dennel, 'i'n't she happy?'

'I never presume to judge,' answered his lordship, smiling; 'but she has always 
something melancholy in her air.'

'Pray how old is she?' said Miss Dennel.

'Eighteen.'

'Dear! and married?—La! I wonder what makes her unhappy!'

'Not a husband, certainly!' said Mrs. Arlbery, laughing, 'that is against all 
chance and probability.'

'Well, I'm resolved when I'm married myself, I won't be unhappy.'

'And how will you help it?'

'O, because I'm determined I won't. I think it's very hard if I may'nt have my 
own way when I'm married.'

''Twill at least be very singular!' answered Mrs. Arlbery.

Camilla now returned to her party, having first conducted her new friend 
towards a door in the park where her carriage was waiting.

'At length, my dear,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'your fair mysterious has, I suppose, 
avowed herself?'

'I made no inquiry,' answered she, painfully looking down.

'I can tell you who she is, then, myself,' said Miss Dennel; 'she is Mrs. 
Berlinton, and she's come out of Wales, and she's married, and she's eighteen.'

'Married!' repeated Camilla, blushing from internal surprise at the 
conversations she had held with her.

'Yes; your fair Incognita is neither more nor less,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'than 
the honourable Mrs. Berlinton, wife to Lord Berlinton's brother, and, next only 
to Lady Alithea Selmore, the first toast, and the reigning cry of the Wells for 
this season.'

Camilla, who had seen and considered her in almost every other point of view, 
heard this with less of pleasure than astonishment. When a further 
investigation brought forth from Lord O'Lerney that her maiden name was 
Melmond, Mrs. Arlbery exclaimed: 'O, then, I cease to play the idiot, and 
wonder! I know the Melmonds well. They are all half crazy, romantic, love-lorn, 
studious, and sentimental. One of them was in Hampshire this summer, but so 
immensely "melancholy and gentleman-like[2]," that I never took him into my 
society.'

''Twas the brother of this young lady, I doubt not,' said Lord O'Lerney; 'he is 
a young man of very good parts, and of an exemplary character; but strong in 
his feelings, and wild in pursuit of whatever excites them.'

'When will you introduce me to your new friend, Miss Tyrold?' said Mrs. 
Arlbery; 'or, rather,' (turning to Lord Newford,) 'I hope your lordship will do 
me that honour; I hear you are very kind to her; and take much care to convince 
her of the ill effects and danger of the evening air.'

'O hang it! O curse it!' cried his lordship; 'why does a woman walk by 
moon-light?'

'Why, rather, should man,' said Lord O'Lerney, 'impede so natural a recreation?'

The age of Lord O'Lerney, which more than doubled that of Lord Newford, made 
this question supported, and even drew forth the condescension of an attempted 
exculpation. 'I vow, my lord,' he cried, 'I had no intention but to look at a 
letter; and that I thought, she only read in public to excite curiosity.'

'O but you knelt to her!' cried Miss Dennel, 'you knelt to her! I saw you! and 
why did you do that, when you knew she was married, and you could not be her 
lover?'

The party being now disposed to return to the Wells, Mrs. Arlbery called upon 
the General to attend her to the phaeton. Camilla, impatient to pay Sir Sedley, 
followed to speak to her; but, not aware of her wish, Mrs. Arlbery hurried 
laughingly on, saying, 'Come, General, let us be gone, that the coach may be 
last, and then Dennel must pay the fees! That will be a good guinea towards my 
ponies!'
