
Mount Pleasant

The shame and distress natural to every unhackneyed mind, in any necessity of 
soliciting a pecuniary favour, had now, in that of Camilla, the additional 
difficulty of coping against the avowed desire of Mrs. Arlbery not to open her 
purse.

When they arrived at Mount Pleasant, she saw all the horsemen alighted, and in 
conversation with that lady; and Edgar move towards the carriage, palpably with 
a design to hand her out: but as the Major advanced, he retreated, and, finding 
himself unnoticed by Mrs. Arlbery, remounted his horse. Provoked and chagrined, 
she sprung forwards alone, and when pursued by the Major, with some of his 
usual compliments, turned from him impatiently and went up stairs.

Intent in thinking only of Edgar, she was not herself aware of this abruptness, 
till Mrs. Arlbery, following her to her chamber, said, 'Why were you so 
suddenly haughty to the Major, my dear Miss Tyrold? Has he offended you?'

Much surprised, she answered, no; but, forced by further questions, to be more 
explicit, confessed she wished to distance him, as his behaviour had been 
remarked.

'Remarked! how? by whom?'

She coloured, and was again hardly pressed before she answered, 'Mr. 
Mandlebert—once—named it to me.'

'O, ho, did he?' said Mrs. Arlbery, surprised in her turn; 'why then, my dear, 
depend upon it, he loves you himself.'

'Me!—Mr. Mandlebert!—' exclaimed Camilla, doubting what she heard.

'Nay, why not?'

'Why not?' repeated she in an excess of perturbation; 'O, he is too good! too 
excelling! he sees all my faults—points them out himself—'

'Does he?...' said Mrs. Arlbery thoughtfully, and pausing: 'nay, then,—if 
so—he wishes to marry you!'

'Me, ma'am!' cried Camilla, blushing high with mingled delight at the idea, and 
displeasure at its free expression.

'Why, else, should he caution you against another?'

'From goodness, from kindness, from generosity!—'

'No, no; those are not the characteristics of young men who counsel young 
women! We all heard he was engaged to your beautiful vacant-looking cousin; but 
I suppose he grew sick of her. A very young man seldom likes a silly wife. It 
is generally when he is further advanced in life that he takes that depraved 
taste. He then flatters himself a fool will be easier to govern.'

She now went away to dress; leaving Camilla a new creature; changed in all her 
hopes, though overwhelmed with shame at the freedom of this attack, and 
determined to exert her utmost strength of mind, not to expose to view the 
secret pleasure with which it filled her.

She was, however, so absent when they met again, that Mrs. Arlbery, shaking her 
head, said: 'Ah, my fair friend! what have you been thinking of?'

Excessively ashamed, she endeavoured to brighten up. The General and Sir Sedley 
had been invited to dinner. The latter was engaged in the evening to Lady 
Alithea Selmore, who gave tea at her own lodgings. 'The Rooms, then, will be 
quite empty,' said Mrs. Arlbery; 'so we had better go to the play.'

Mr. Dennel had no objection, and Sir Sedley promised to attend them, as it 
would be time enough for her ladyship afterwards.

So completely was Camilla absorbed in her new ideas, that she forgot both her 
borrowed guinea, and the state of her purse, till she arrived at the theatre. 
The recollection was then too late; and she had no resource against completely 
emptying it.

She was too happy however, at this instant, to admit any regret. The sagacity 
of Mrs. Arlbery she thought infallible; and the sight of Edgar in a box just 
facing her, banished every other consideration.

The theatre was almost without company. The assembly at Lady Alithea Selmore's 
had made it unfashionable, and when the play was over, Edgar found easily a 
place in the box.

Lord Newford and Sir Theophilus Jarard looked in just after, and affected not 
to know the piece was begun. Sir Sedley retired to his toilette, and Mr. Dennel 
to seek his carriage.

Some bills now got into the box, and were read by Sir Theophilus, announcing a 
superb exhibition of wild beasts for the next day, consisting chiefly of 
monkies who could perform various feats, and a famous ourang outang, just 
landed from Africa.

Lord Newford said he would go if he had but two more days to live. Sir 
Theophilus echoed him. Mr. Dennel expressed some curiosity; Miss Dennel, though 
she protested she should be frightened out of her wits, said she would not stay 
at home; Mrs. Arlbery confessed it would be an amusing sight to see so many 
representations of the dear human race; but Camilla spoke not: and scarce heard 
even the subject of discourse.

'You,' cried the Major, addressing her, 'will be there?'

'Where?' demanded she.

'To see this curious collection of animals.'

'It will be curious, undoubtedly,' said Edgar, pleased that she made no answer; 
'but 'tis a species of curiosity not likely to attract the most elegant 
spectators; and rather, perhaps, adapted to give pleasure to naturalists, than 
to young ladies.'

Softened, at this moment, in every feeling of her heart towards Edgar, she 
turned to him, and said, 'Do you think it would be wrong to go?'

'Wrong,' repeated he, surprised though gratified, 'is perhaps too hard a word; 
but, I fear, at an itinerant show, such as this, a young lady would run some 
chance of finding herself in a neighbourhood that might seem rather strange to 
her.'

'Most certainly then,' cried she, with quickness, 'I will not go!'

The astonished Edgar looked at her with earnestness, and saw the simplicity of 
sincerity on her countenance. He looked then at the Major; who, accustomed to 
frequent failures in his solicitations, exhibited no change of features. Again 
he looked at Camilla, and her eyes met his with a sweetness of expression that 
passed straight to his heart.

Mrs. Arlbery now led the way to the coach; the forwardness of the Major, though 
in her own despight, procured him the hand of Camilla; but she had left upon 
Edgar an impression renovating to all his esteem. She is still, he thought, the 
same; candid, open, flexible; still, therefore, let me follow her, with such 
counsel as I am able to give. She has accused me of unkindness;—She was 
right! I retreated from her service at the moment when, in honour, I was bound 
to continue in it. How selfish was such conduct! how like such common love as 
seeks only its own gratification, not the happiness or welfare of its object! 
Could she, though but lately so dear to me, that all the felicity of my life 
seemed to hang upon her, become as nothing, because destined to another? No! 
Her father has been my father, and so long as she retains his respected name, I 
will watch by her unceasingly.

In their way home, one of the horses tired, and could not be made to drag the 
carriage up to Mount Pleasant. They were therefore obliged to alight and walk. 
Mrs. Arlbery took the arm of Mr. Dennel, which she did not spare, and his 
daughter, almost crying with sleep and fatigue, made the same use of Camilla's. 
She protested she had never been so long upon her feet in her life as that very 
morning in Knowle Park, and, though she leant upon her companion with as little 
scruple as upon a walking stick, she frequently stopt short, and declared she 
should stay upon the road all night, for she could not move another step: and 
they were still far from the summit, when she insisted upon sitting down, 
saying fretfully, 'I am sure I wish I was married! Nobody minds me. I am sure 
if I was, I would not be served so. I'm resolved I'll always have two coaches, 
one to come after me, and one to ride in; for I'm determined I won't marry a 
man that has not a great fortune. I'm sure papa could afford it too, if he'd a 
mind; only he won't. Every body vexes me. I'm sure I'm ready to cry!'

Mr. Dennel and Mrs. Arlbery, who neither of them, at any time, took the 
smallest notice of what she said, passed on, and left the whole weight both of 
her person and her complaints to Camilla. The latter, however, now reached the 
ears of a fat, tidy, neat looking elderly woman, who, in a large black bonnet, 
and a blue checked apron, was going their way; she approached them, and in a 
good-humoured voice, said: 'What! poor dear! why you seem tired to death? come, 
get up, my dear; be of good heart, and you shall hold by my arm; for that 
t'other poor thing's almost hauled to pieces.'

Miss Dennel accepted both the pity and the proposal; and the substantial arm of 
her new friend, gave her far superior aid to the slight one of Camilla.

'Well, and how did you like the play, my dears?' cried the woman.

'La!' said Miss Dennel, 'how should you know we were at the play?'

'O, I have a little bird,' answered she, sagaciously nodding, 'that tells me 
everything! you sat in the stage box?'

'Dear! so we did! How can you tell that? Was you in the gallery?'

'No, my dear, nor yet in the pit neither. And you had three gentlemen behind 
you, besides that gentleman that's going up the Mount?'

'Dear! So we had! But how do you know? did you peep at us behind the scenes?'

'No, my dear; I never went behind the scenes. But come, I hope you'll do now, 
for you ha'n't much further to go.'

'Dear! how do you know that?'

'Because you live at that pretty house, there, up Mount Pleasant, that's got 
the little closet window.'

'La, yes! who told you so?'

'And there's a pretty cat belonging to the house, all streaked brown and black?'

'O, la!' exclaimed Miss Dennel, half screaming, and letting go her arm, 'I dare 
say you're a fortune-teller! Pray, don't speak to me till we get to the light!'

She now hung back, so terrified that neither Camilla could encourage, nor the 
woman appease her; and she was going to run down the hill, forgetting all her 
weariness, to seek refuge from the servants, when the woman said, 'Why what's 
here to do? Why see, my dear, if I must let you into the secret—you must 
know—but don't tell it to the world!—I'm a gentlewoman!' She then removed 
her checked apron, and shewed a white muslin one, embroidered and flounced.

Miss Dennel was now struck with a surprise, of which Camilla bore an equal 
share. Their new acquaintance appeared herself in some confusion, but having 
exacted a promise not to be discovered to the world, she told them, she lodged 
at a house upon Mount Pleasant, just by their's, whence she often saw them; 
that, having a ticket given her, by a friend, for the play, she dressed herself 
and went into a box, with some very genteel company, who kept their coach, and 
who sat her down afterwards at another friend's, where she pretended she should 
be fetched: 'But I do my own way,' continued she, 'and nobody knows a word of 
the matter: for I keep a large bonnet, and cloak, and a checked apron, and a 
pair of clogs, or pattens, always at this friend's; and then when I have put 
them on, people take me for a mere common person, and I walk on, ever so late, 
and nobody speaks to me; and so by that means I get my pleasure, and save my 
money; and yet always appear like a gentlewoman when I'm known.'

She then again charged them to be discreet, saying that if this were spread to 
the world, she should be quite undone, for many ladies that took her about with 
them, would notice her no more. At the same time, as she wished to make 
acquaintance with such pretty young ladies, she proposed that they should all 
three meet in a walk before the house, the next morning, and talk together as 
if for the first time.

Camilla, who detested all tricks, declined entering into this engagement; but 
Miss Dennel, charmed with the ingenuity of her new acquaintance, accepted the 
appointment.

Camilla had, however, her own new friend for the opening of the next day. 'Ah! 
my sweet protectress!' cried she, throwing her arms about her neck, 'what am I 
not destined to owe you? The very sight of that man is horror to me. Amiable, 
generous creature! what a sight was yours, when turning round, I met your eyes, 
and beheld him no more!'

'Your alarm, at which I cannot wonder,' said Camilla, 'prevented your seeing 
your safety; for Lord Newford was with a large party.'

'O, he is obnoxious to my view! wherever I may see him, in public or in 
private, I shall fly him. He would have torn from me the loved characters of my 
heart's best correspondent!—'

Camilla now felt a little shocked, and colouring and interrupting her, said: 
'Is it possible, Mrs. Berlinton—' and stopt not knowing how to go on.

'Ah! you know me, then! You know my connexions and my situation!' cried she, 
hiding her face on Camilla's bosom: 'tell me, at least, tell me, you do not 
therefore contemn and abhor me?'

'Heaven forbid!' said Camilla, terrified at such a preparation; 'what can I 
hear that can give you so cruel an idea?'

'Alas! know you not I have prophaned at the altar my plighted vows to the most 
odious of men? That I have formed an alliance I despise? and that I bear a name 
I think of with disgust, and hate ever to own?'

Camilla, thunderstruck, answered; 'No, indeed! I know nothing of all this!'

'Ah! guard yourself, then, well,' cried she, bursting into tears, 'from a 
similar fate! My friends are kind and good, but the temptation of seeing me 
rich beguiled them. I was disinterested and contented myself, but young and 
inexperienced; and I yielded to their pleadings, unaware of their consequences. 
Alas! I was utterly ignorant both of myself and the world! I knew not how 
essential to my own peace was an amiable companion; and I knew not, 
then,—that the world contained one just formed to make me happy!'

She now hung down her head, weeping and desponding. Camilla sought to sooth 
her, but was so amazed, so fearful, and so perplext, she scarce knew what 
either to say or to think.

The fair mourner, at length, a little recovering, added: 'Let me not agitate 
your gentle bosom with my sorrows. I regard you as an angel sent to console 
them; but it must be by mitigating, not partaking of them.'

Camilla was sensibly touched; and though strangely at a loss what to judge, 
felt her affections deeply interested.

'I dreaded,' she continued, 'to tell you my name, for I dreaded to sink myself 
into your contempt, by your knowledge of an alliance you must deem so 
mercenary. 'Twas folly to hope you would not hear it; yet I wished first to 
obtain, at least, your good will. The dear lost name of Melmond is all I love 
to pronounce! That name, I believe, is known to you; so may be, also, perhaps, 
my brother's unhappy story?'

Melmond, she then said, believing Miss Lynmere betrothed to Mr. Mandlebert, had 
quitted Hampshire in misery, to finish his vacation in Wales, with their mutual 
friends. There he heard that the rumour was false; and would instantly have 
returned and thrown himself at the feet of the young lady, by whose cousin, Mr. 
Lionel Tyrold, he had been told she was to inherit a large fortune; when this 
second report, also, was contradicted, and he learnt that Miss Lynmere had 
almost nothing; 'My brother,' added she, 'with the true spirit of true 
sentiment, was but the more urgent to pursue her; but our relations 
interfered—and he, like me, is doomed to endless anguish!'

The accident, she said, of the preceding morning, was owing to her being 
engaged in reading Rowe's letters from the dead to the living; which had so 
infinitely enchanted her, that, desiring to peruse them without interruption, 
yet fearing to again wander in search of a rural retreat, she had driven to 
Knowle; where, hearing the noble family was absent, she had asked leave to view 
the park, and there had taken out her delicious book, which she was enjoying in 
the highest luxury of solitude and sweet air, when Lord Newford broke in upon 
her.

Camilla enquired if she feared any bad consequences, by telling Mr. Berlinton 
of his impertinence.

'Heaven forbid,' she answered, 'that I should be condemned to speak to Mr. 
Berlinton of anything that concerns or befalls me! I see him as little as I am 
able, and speak to him as seldom.'

Camilla heard this with grief, but durst not further press a subject so 
delicate. They continued together till noon, and then reluctantly parted, upon 
a message from Mrs. Arlbery that the carriages were waiting. Mrs. Berlinton 
declined being introduced to that lady, which would only, she said, occasion 
interruptions to their future tête-à-têtes.

Neither the thoughtlessness of the disposition, nor the gaiety of the 
imagination of Camilla, could disguise from her understanding the glaring 
eccentricity of this conduct and character: but she saw them with more of 
interest than blame; the various attractions with which they were mixed, 
blending in her opinion something between pity and admiration, more 
captivating, though more dangerous, to the fond fancy of youth, than the most 
solid respect, and best founded esteem.
