
The Rooms

The evening, as usual, was destined to the Rooms. The first object Camilla 
perceived upon her entrance was Edgar, and the smile with which she met his eye 
brought him instantly to her side. That smile was not less radiant for his 
nearer approach; nor was his pleasure in it less animated for observing that 
Major Cerwood was not of her party, nor as yet in the room. The opportunity 
seemed inviting to engage her himself; to suggest and to find it irresistible 
was the same thing, and he inquired if her whole evening were arranged, or she 
would go down two dances with an old friend.

The softness of her assent was even exquisite delight to him; and, as they all 
walked up and down the apartment, though he addressed her but little, and 
though she spoke but in answer, every word he uttered she received as couching 
some gentle meaning, and every syllable she replied, he thought conveyed 
something of flattering interest: and although all was upon open and 
unavoidable subjects, he had no eyes but for her, she had no attention but for 
him.

This quiet, yet heart-felt intercourse, was soon a little interrupted by the 
appearance of a large and striking party, led on by Lady Alithea Selmore; for 
which every body made way, to which every body turned, and which, passing by 
all the company without seeming conscious there was any to pass, formed a mass 
at the upper end of the room, with an air and manner of such exclusive 
attention to their chief, or to one another, that common observation would have 
concluded some film before their eyes obstructed their discerning that they 
were not the sole engrossers of the apartment.

But such was not the judgment formed of them by Mrs. Arlbery, who, forced by 
the stream to give them passage, paid herself for the condescension by a 
commentary upon the passengers. 'Those good people,' said she, 'strive to make 
us believe we are nothing to them. They strive even to believe it themselves. 
But this is the mere semblance worn by pride and affectation, to veil internal 
fatigue. They come hither to recruit their exhausted powers, not, indeed, by 
joining in our society, but by a view of new objects for their senses, and the 
flattering idea, for their minds, of the envy or admiration they excite. They 
are all people of some consequence, and many of them are people of title: but 
these are far the most supportable of the group; their privileged superiority 
over the rest is so marked and indisputable, that they are saved the trouble 
either of claiming or ascertaining it: but those who approach their rank 
without reaching it, live in a constant struggle to make known their 
importance. Indeed, I have often seen that people of title are less gratified 
with the sound of their own honours, than people of no title in pronouncing 
them.'

Sir Sedley Clarendel was of this set. Like the rest he passed Mrs. Arlbery 
without seeming to notice her, and was passing Camilla in the same manner; but 
not aware this was only to be fine, like the party to which he belonged, she 
very innocently spoke to him herself, to hope he got safe to his lodgings, 
without feeling any further ill effect from his accident.

Sir Sedley, though internally much gratified by this interest in his safety, 
which in Camilla was the result of having herself endangered it, looked as if 
he scarce recollected her, and making hastily a kind of half bow, walked on 
with his company.

Camilla, who had no view, nor one serious thought concerning him, was rather 
amused than displeased by his caprices; and was preparing to relate the history 
of his lameness to Edgar, who seemed surprised and even hurt by her addressing 
him, and by his so slightly passing her, when the entrance of another splendid 
party interrupted all discourse.

And here, to her utter amaze, she beheld, as chief of the group, her romantic 
new friend; not leading, indeed, like Lady Alithea Selmore, a train, but 
surrounded by admirers, who, seeking no eye but hers, seemed dim and humble 
planets, moving round a radiant sun.

Camilla now, forgetting Sir Sedley, would have taken this moment to narrate her 
adventure with Mrs. Berlinton, had not her design been defeated by the approach 
of the Major. He belonged to this last group, but was the only one that 
separated from it. He spoke to Camilla with his usual air of devotion, told her 
he had dined with Mrs. Berlinton, to whose husband, whom he had taken for her 
grandfather, he had been just introduced; and begged to know of Mrs. Arlbery if 
he might have the pleasure of bringing them all acquainted; an offer which 
Camilla, unauthorised by Mrs. Berlinton, had not ventured to make. Mrs. Arlbery 
declined the proposal; not anxious to mix where she had small chance of 
presiding.

The party, after traversing the room, took full and exclusive possession of a 
considerable spot just below that occupied by Lady Alithea.

These two companies completely engrossed all attention, amply supplying the 
rest of the assembly with topics for discourse. The set with Lady Alithea 
Selmore was, in general, haughty, supercilious, and taciturn; looking around 
with eyes determined to see neither any person nor any thing before them, and 
rarely speaking, except to applaud what fell from her ladyship; who far less 
proud, because a lover of popularity, deigned herself, from time to time, a 
slight glance at the company, to see if she was observed, and to enjoy its 
reverence.

The party to which Mrs. Berlinton was the loadstone, was far more attractive to 
the disciples of nature, though less sedulously sought by those whom the 
manners and maxims of the common world had sophisticated. They were gay, 
elegant, desirous to please, because pleased themselves; and though some of 
them harboured designs deeper and more dangerous than any formed by the 
votaries of rank, they appeared to have nothing more in view than to decorate 
with flowers the present moment. The magnetic influence of beauty was, however, 
more powerful than that of the ton; for though Mrs. Berlinton, from time to 
time, allured a beau from Lady Alithea Selmore, her ladyship, during the whole 
season, had not one retaliation to boast. But, on the other hand, the females, 
in general, strove to cluster about Lady Alithea; Mrs. Berlinton leaving them 
no greater chance of rival-ship in conversation than in charms.

Edgar had made way upon the approach of the Major, who wore an air of superior 
claim extremely unpleasant to him; but, since already engaged to Camilla, he 
meant to return to her when the dancing began.

She concluded he left her but to speak to some acquaintance, and was, herself, 
amply occupied in observing her new friend. The light in which she now beheld 
her, admired, pursued, and adulated, elegantly adorned in her person, and 
evidently with but one rival for fame and fashion in Tunbridge, filled her with 
astonishment. Nothing could less assort with her passion for solitude, her 
fondness for literary and sentimental discussions, and her enthusiasm in 
friendship. But her surprise was mixed with praise and admiration, when she 
reflected upon the soft humility, and caressing sweetness of her manners, yet 
found her, by general consent, holding this elevated rank in society.

The Major earnestly pressed to conduct Camilla to this coterie, assuring her 
Mrs. Berlinton would not have passed, had she seen her, for, during dinner, and 
at coffee, she had talked of nobody else. Camilla heard this with pleasure, but 
shrunk from all advances, and strove rather to hide than shew herself, that 
Mrs. Berlinton might have full liberty either to seek or avoid her. She wished 
to consult Edgar upon this acquaintance; though the present splendour of her 
appearance, and the number of her followers, made her fear she could never 
induce him to do justice to the sweetness and endearment of her social powers.

When the Major found he pleaded in vain, he said he would at least let Mrs. 
Berlinton know where to look for her; and went himself to that lady.

Edgar, who had felt sensibly mortified to observe, when he retreated, that the 
eyes and attention of Camilla had been wholly bestowed upon what he considered 
merely as a new scene, was now coming forward; when he saw Mrs. Berlinton 
hastily rise, suddenly break from all her adulators, and, with quick steps and 
animated gestures, traverse the apartment, to address Camilla, whom, taking by 
both her hands, which she pressed to her heart, she conjured, in the most 
flattering terms, to accompany her back.

Camilla was much gratified; yet, from delicacy to Mrs. Arlbery, stimulated by 
the fear of missing her expected partner in the country dances, declined the 
invitation: Mrs. Berlinton looked disappointed; but said she would not be 
importunate, and returned alone.

Camilla, a little disturbed, besought the Major to follow, with an offer of 
spending with her, if she pleased, the whole of the ensuing day.

'Charming!' cried the Major, 'for I am engaged to her myself already.'

To Camilla this hearing was distressing; to Edgar it was scarcely endurable. 
But she could not retract, and Edgar was stopt in the inquiries he meant to 
make concerning this striking new acquaintance, by an abrupt declaration from 
Mrs. Arlbery, that the Rooms were insufferable, and she would immediately go 
home. She then gave her hand to the General, and Miss Dennel took the arm of 
Camilla, murmuring, that she would never leave the Rooms at such an early hour 
again, when once she was married.

To quit Edgar thus, at the very moment of renewed intercourse and amity, seemed 
too cruel; and Camilla, though with blushes, and stammering, whispered Mrs. 
Arlbery, 'What can I do, ma'am? most unfortunately I have engaged myself to 
dance?'

'With whom?'

'With—Mr.—Mandlebert.'

'O, vastly well! Stay, then by all means: but, as he has not engaged me too, 
allow me, I beseech you, to escape. Mrs. Berlinton will, I am sure, be happy to 
take care of you.'

This scheme was, to Camilla, the most pleasant that could be proposed; and, at 
the same instant, the Major returned to her, with these words written with a 
pencil upon the back of a letter.

'To-morrow, and next day, and next day, come to me, my lovely friend; every 
thing, and every body fatigues me but yourself.'

Camilla, obliged again to have recourse to the Major, wrote, upon the same 
paper, 'Can you have the goodness to convey me to Mount Pleasant to-night, if I 
stay?' and begged him to bring her an answer. She entreated, also, Mrs. Arlbery 
to stop till it arrived, which was almost in the same minute; for the eye of 
Mrs. Berlinton had but glanced upon the words, ere her soft and lovely form was 
again with their fair writer, with whom, smiling and delighted, she walked 
back, arm in arm, to her place.

Mrs. Arlbery and the General, and Mr. and Miss Dennel, now left the room.

Edgar viewed all this with amazement. He found that the young lady she joined 
was sister-in-law to a peer, and as fashionable as she was beautiful; but could 
not fathom how so great an intimacy had so suddenly been formed.

Camilla, thus distinguished, became now herself an object of peculiar notice; 
her own personal claim to particular attention, her dejection had forfeited, 
for it had robbed her eyes of their animation, and her countenance of its play; 
but no contagion spreads with greater certainty nor greater speed than that of 
fashion; slander itself is not more sure of promulgation. She was now looked at 
by all present as if seen for the first time; every one discovered in her some 
charm, some grace, some excellence; those who, the minute before, had passed 
her with perfect indifference, said it was impossible to see and not be struck 
with her; and all agreed she could appear upon no spot under the sun, and not 
instinctively be singled out, as formed to shine in the highest sphere.

But he by whom this transaction was observed with most pleasure, was Sir Sedley 
Clarendel. The extraordinary service he had performed for Camilla, and the 
grateful interest she had shewn him in return, had led him to consider her with 
an attention so favourable, that, without half her merit, or half her beauty, 
she could not have failed rising in his estimation, and exciting his regard: 
and she had now a superior charm that distanced every other; she had been asked 
to dance, yet refused it, by a man of celebrity in the ton; and she was 
publicly sought and caressed by the only rival at Tunbridge, in that species of 
renown, to Lady Alithea Selmore.

He felt an increased desire to be presented to Mrs. Berlinton himself; and, 
gliding from his own circle as quietly as he could contrive, not to offend Lady 
Alithea, who, though she laughed at the little Welsh rustic, was watchful of 
her votaries, and jealous of her rising power, came gently behind Lord O'Lerney 
and whispered his request.

He was received by the young beauty with that grace, and that sweetness which 
rendered her so generally bewitching, yet with an air that proved her already 
accustomed to admiration, and untouched by its intoxicating qualities. All that 
was voluntary of her attention was bestowed exclusively upon Camilla, though, 
when addressed and called upon by others, she answered without impatience, and 
looked without displeasure.

This conduct, at the same time that it shewed her in a point of view the most 
amiable, raised Camilla higher and higher in the eyes of the by-standers: and, 
in a few minutes more, the general cry throughout the assembly was, to inquire 
who was the young lady thus brought forward by Mrs. Berlinton.

Edgar heard this with increased anxiety. Has she discretion, has she fortitude, 
thought he, to withstand public distinction? Will it not spoil her for private 
life; estrange her from family concerns? render tasteless and insipid the 
conjugal and maternal characters, meant by Nature to form not only the most 
sacred of duties, but the most delicious of enjoyments?

Very soon after, this anxiety was tinctured with a feeling more severe; he saw 
her spoken to negligently by Sir Sedley; he required, after what he had already 
himself deemed impertinence from the Baronet, that she should have assumed to 
him a distant dignity; but he perceived, on the contrary, that she answered him 
with pleasant alacrity, and, when not engaged by Mrs. Berlinton, attended to 
him, even with distinction.

Alas! thought he, the degradation from the true female character is already 
begun! already the lure of fashion draws her from what she owes to delicacy and 
propriety, to give a willing reception to insolence and foppery!

Camilla, meanwhile, unsuspicious of his remarks, and persuaded every civility 
in her power was due to Sir Sedley, was gay, pleased, and pleasing; happy to 
consider herself under the guidance, and restored to the amity of Edgar, and 
determined to acquaint him with all her affairs, and consult him upon all her 
proceedings.

The dancing, for which mutually they languished, as the mutual means of 
reunion, seemed not to be the humour of the evening, and those who were ready 
for it, were not of sufficient consequence to bring it forward. But when Mrs. 
Berlinton mentioned, that she had been taking some lessons in a cotillon, a 
universal cry was raised by all her party, to try one immediately. She pleaded 
in vain her inexperience in such dances; they insisted there was nobody present 
that could criticise, that her form alone would compensate for every mistake of 
rule, and that the best lesson was easy practice.

She was soon gained, for she was not addicted to denials; but the application 
which ensued to Camilla was acceded to less promptly. As there were but two 
other ladies in the circle of Mrs. Berlinton, her assistance was declared to be 
indispensable. She pleaded inability of every sort, though to dance without 
Edgar was her only real objection; for she had no false shame in being ignorant 
of what she never had learnt. But Mrs. Berlinton protested she would not rise 
if she were the only novice to be exhibited; and the Major then prepared to 
prostrate himself at the feet of Camilla; who, hastily, and ashamed, stood up, 
to prevent an action that Edgar might misinterpret.

Hoping, however, now, to at least draw him into their set, she ventured to 
acknowledge to Mrs. Berlinton, that she was already engaged, in case she danced.

The Major, who heard her, and who knew it was not to himself, strenuously 
declared this could only be for country dances, and therefore would not 
interfere with a cotillon.

'Will country dances, then,' said she, blushing, 'follow?'

'Certainly, if any one has spirit to begin them.'

The cotillon was now played, and the preceding bow from the opposite Major 
forced her courtsie in return.

The little skill in this dance of one of the performers, and the total want of 
it in another, made it a mere pleasantry to all, though the youth and beauty of 
the two who did the worst, rendered them objects of admiration, that left 
nearly unnoticed those who did best.

To Camilla what belonged to pleasantry in this business was of short duration. 
When the cotillon was over, she saw nothing of Edgar. She looked around, 
mortified, disappointed. No one called for a country dance; and the few who had 
wished for it, concluding all chance over when a cotillon was begun, had now 
retired, or given it up.

What was this disappointment, compared with the sufferings of Edgar? Something 
of a contest, and of entreaties, had reached his ears, while he had hovered 
near the party, or strolled up and down the room. He had gathered the subject 
was dancing, and he saw the Major most earnest with Camilla. He was sure it was 
for her hand, and concluded it was for a country dance; but could she forfeit 
her engagement? were matters so far advanced, as to make her so openly shew him 
all prevailing, all powerful, not only over all rivals, but, according to the 
world's established customs upon these occasions, over all decorum?

Presently, he saw the Major half kneel; he saw her rise to prevent the 
prostration; and he heard the dance called.

He could bear no more; pain intolerable seized, distracted him, and he abruptly 
quitted the ballroom, lest the Major should approach him with some happy 
apology, which he was unfitted to receive.

He could only settle his ideas by supposing she really loved Major Cerwood, and 
had suffered her character to be infected by the indelicacy that made a part of 
his own. Yet why had she so striven to deny all regard, all connection? what an 
unaccountable want of frankness! what a miserable dereliction of truth!

His first impulse was to set off instantly from Tunbridge; but his second 
thoughts represented the confession this would make. He was too proud to leave 
the Major, whom he despised, such a triumph, and too much hurt to permit 
Camilla herself to know him so poignantly wounded. She could not, indeed, but 
be struck by his retreat; he resolved, however, to try to meet with her the 
next day, and to speak to her with the amity they had so lately arranged, yet 
in a way that should manifest him wholly free from all other interest or view.
