
Counsels for Conquest

Fortunately for Camilla, no eye was upon her at this period but that of Mrs. 
Arlbery; her changed countenance, else, must have betrayed still more widely 
her emotion. Mrs. Arlbery saw it with real concern, and saying she had 
something to consult her about, hurried on with her alone.

Camilla scarce knew that she did, or what she suffered; the suddenness of 
surprise, which involved so severe a disappointment, almost stupified her 
faculties. Mrs. Arlbery did not utter one word by the way, and, when they 
arrived at home, saw her to her chamber, pressed her hand, and left her.

She now, from a sense of shame, came to her full recollection. She was 
convinced all her feelings were understood by Mrs. Arlbery; she thought over 
what her father had said upon such exposures, and hopeless of any honorable end 
to her suspences, earnestly wished herself back at Etherington, to hide in his 
revered breast her confusion and grief.

Even Mrs. Arlbery she now believed had been mistaken; Edgar appeared never to 
have loved her; his attentions, his kindness, had all flowed from friendship; 
his solicitude, his counsel had been the result of family regard.

When called to dinner, she descended with downcast eyes. She found no company 
invited; she felt thankful, yet abashed; and Mrs. Arlbery let her retire when 
the meal was over, but soon followed to beg she would prepare for the play.

She saw her hastily putting away her handkerchief, and dispersing her tears. 
'Ah! my dear,' cried she, taking her hand, 'I am afraid this old friend of 
yours does not much contribute to make Tunbridge Wells salubrious to you!'

Camilla, affecting not to understand her, said she had never been in better 
health.

'Of mind, do you mean, or body?' cried Mrs. Arlbery, laughing; but seeing she 
only redoubled her distress, more seriously added, 'Will you suffer me, my dear 
Miss Tyrold, to play the old friend, also, and speak to you with openness?'

Camilla durst not say no, though she feared to say yes.

'I must content myself with a tacit compliance, if I can obtain no other. I am 
really uneasy to talk with you; not, believe me, from officiousness nor 
impertinence, but from a persuasion I may be able to promote your happiness. 
You won't speak, I see? And you judge perfectly right; for the less you 
disclaim, the less I shall torment you. Permit me, therefore, to take for 
granted that you are already aware I am acquainted with the state of your 
heart.'

Camilla, trembling, had now no wish but to fly; she fastened her eyes upon the 
door, and every thought was devoted to find the means of escape.

'Nay, nay, if you look frightened in sober sadness, I am gone. But shall I 
think less, or know less, for saying nothing? It is not speech, my dear Miss 
Tyrold, that makes detections: It only proclaims them.'

A sigh was all the answer of Camilla: though, assured, thus, she had nothing to 
gain by flight, she forced herself to stay.

'We understand one another, I see, perfectly. Let me now, then, as unaffectedly 
go on, as if the grand explanation had been verbally made. That your fancy, my 
fair young friend, has hit upon a tormentor, I will not deny; yet not upon an 
ingrate; for this person, little as you seem conscious of your power, certainly 
loves you.'

Surprised off all sort of guard, Camilla exclaimed, 'O no!—O no!'

Mrs. Arlbery smiled, but went on. 'Yes, my dear, he undoubtedly does you that 
little justice; yet, if you are not well advised, his passion will be 
unavailing; and your artlessness, your facility, and your innocence, with his 
knowledge, nay, his very admiration of them, will operate but to separate you.'

Glowing with opposing yet strong emotions at these words, the countenance of 
Camilla asked an explanation, in defiance of her earnest desire to look 
indifferent or angry.

'You will wonder, and very naturally, how such attractions should work as 
repulses; but I will be plain and clear, and you must be candid and rational, 
and forgive me. These attractions, my dear, will be the source of this 
mischief, because he sees, by their means, that you are undoubtedly at his 
command.'

'No, madam! no, Mrs. Arlbery!' cried Camilla, in whose pride now every other 
feeling was concentrated, 'he does not, cannot see it!—'

'I would not hurt you for the world, my very amiable young friend; but pardon 
me if I say, that not to see it—he must be blinder than I imagine 
him!—blinder than ... to tell you the truth, I am much inclined to think any 
of his race.'

Confounded, irritated, and wounded, Camilla remained a moment silent, and then, 
though scarce articulately, answered: 'If such is your opinion ... at least he 
shall see it ... fancy it, I mean ... no more!...'

'Keep to that resolution, and you will behold him ... where he ought to be ... 
at your feet.'

Irresistibly, though most unwillingly, appeased by this unexpected conclusion, 
she turned away to hide a blush in which anger had not solely a place, and 
suffered Mrs. Arlbery to go on.

'There is but one single method to make a man of his ruminating class know his 
own mind: give him cause to fear he will lose you. Animate, inspirit, inspire 
him with doubt.'

'But why, ma'am,' cried Camilla, in a faltering voice; 'why shall you suppose I 
will take any method at all?'

'The apprehension you will take none is the very motive that urges me to speak 
to you. You are young enough in the world to think men come of themselves. But 
you are mistaken, my dear. That happens rarely; except with inflamed and 
hot-headed boys, whose passions are in their first innocence as well as 
violence. Mandlebert has already given the dominion of his to other rulers, who 
will take more care of his pride, though not of his happiness. Attend to one 
who has travelled further into life than yourself, and believe me when I 
assert, that his bane, and yours alike, is his security.'

With a colour yet deeper than ever, Camilla resentfully repeated, 'Security!'

'Nay, how can he doubt? with a situation in life such as his....'

'Situation in life! Do you think he can ever suppose that would have the least, 
the most minute weight with me?'

'Why, it would be a very shocking supposition, I allow! but yet, somehow or 
other, that same sordid thing called money, does manage to produce such 
abundance of little comforts and pretty amusements, that one is apt ... to half 
suspect ... it may really not much add to any matrimonial aversion.'

The very idea of such a suspicion offended Camilla beyond all else that had 
passed; Mrs. Arlbery appeared to her indelicate, unkind, and ungenerous, and 
regretting she had ever seen, and repenting she had ever known her, she sunk 
upon a chair in a passionate burst of tears.

Mrs. Arlbery embraced her, begged her pardon a thousand times; assured her all 
she had uttered was the effect of esteem as well as of affection, since she saw 
her too delicate, and too inexperienced, to be aware either of the dangers or 
the advantages surrounding her; and that very far from meaning to hurt her, she 
had few things more at heart than the desire of proving the sincerity of her 
regard, and endeavouring to contribute to her happiness.

Camilla thanked her, dried her eyes, and strove to appear composed; but she was 
too deeply affected for internal consolation: she felt herself degraded in 
being openly addressed as a love-sick girl; and injured in being supposed, for 
a moment, capable of any mercenary view. She desired to be excused going out, 
and to have the evening to herself; not on account of the expence of the play; 
she had again wholly forgotten her poverty; but to breathe a little alone, and 
indulge the sadness of her mind.

Mrs. Arlbery, unfeignedly sorry to have caused her any pain, would not oppose 
her inclination; she repeated her apologies, dragged from her an assurance of 
forgiveness, and went down stairs alone to a summons from Sir Sedley Clarendel.

The first moments of her departure were spent by Camilla in the deepest 
dejection; from which, however, the recollection of her father, and her solemn 
engagement to him, soon after awakened her. She read again his injunctions, and 
resolving not to add to her unhappiness by any failure in her duty, determined 
to make her appearance with some spirit before Mrs. Arlbery set out.

'My dear Clarendel,' cried that lady, as she entered the parlour, 'this poor 
little girl is in a more serious plight than I had conjectured. I have been 
giving her a few hints, from the stores of my worldly knowledge, and they 
appear to her so detestably mean and vulgar, that they have almost broken her 
heart. The arrival of this odious Mandlebert has overthrown all our schemes. We 
are cut up, Sir Sedley! completely cut up!'

'O, indubitably to a degree!' cried the Baronet, with an air of mingled pique 
and conceit; 'how could it be otherwise? Exists the wight who could dream of 
competition with Mandlebert!'

'Nay, now, my dear Clarendel, you enchant me. If you view his power with 
resentment, you are the man in the world to crumble it to the dust. To work, 
therefore, dear creature, without delay.'

'But how must I go about it? a little instruction, for pity!'

'Charming innocent! So you don't know how to try to make yourself agreeable?'

'Not in the least! I am ignorant to a redundance.'

'And were you never more adroit?'

'Never. A goth in grain! Witless from the first muling in my nurse's arms!'

'Come, come, a truce for a moment, with foppery, and answer me seriously; Were 
you ever in love, Clarendel? speak the truth. I am just seized with a 
passionate desire to know.'

'Why ... yes ...' answered he, pulling his lips with his fingers, 'I think—I 
rather think ... I was once.'

'O tell! tell! tell!'

'Nay, I am not very positive. One hears it is to happen; and one is put upon 
thinking of it, while so very young, that one soon takes it for granted. Define 
it a little, and I can answer you more accurately. Pray, is it any thing beyond 
being very fond, and very silly, with a little touch of melancholy?'

'Precise! precise! Tell me, therefore, what it was that caught you. Beauty? 
Fortune? Flattery? or Wit? Speak! speak! I die to know!'

'O, I have forgotten all that these hundred years! I have not the smallest 
trace left!'

'You are a terrible coxcomb, my dear Clarendel! and I am a worse myself for 
giving you so much encouragement. But, however, we must absolutely do something 
for this fair and drooping violet. She won't go even to the play tonight.'

'Lovely lily! how shall we rear it? Tell her I beg her to be of our party.'

'You beg her? My dear Sir Sedley! what do you talk of?'

'Tell her 'tis my entreaty, my supplication!'

'And you think that will make her comply?'

'You will see.'

'Bravo, my dear Clarendel, bravo! However, if you have the courage to send such 
a message, I have not to deliver it: but I will write it for you.'

She then wrote,

'Sir Sedley Clarendel asserts, that if you are not as inexorable as you are 
fair, you will not refuse to join our little party tonight at the theatre.'

Camilla, after a severe conflict from this note, which she concluded to be the 
mere work of Mrs. Arlbery to draw her from retirement, sent word she would wait 
upon her.

Sir Sedley heard the answer with exultation, and Mrs. Arlbery with surprise. 
She declared, however, that since he possessed this power, she should not 
suffer it to lie dormant, but make it work upon her fair friend, till it either 
excited jealousy in Mandlebert, or brought indifference to herself. 'My 
resolution,' cried she, 'is fixt; either to see him at her feet, or drive him 
from her heart.'

Camilla, presently descending, looked away from Mrs. Arlbery; but, unsuspicious 
as she was undesigning, thanked the Baronet for his message, and told him she 
had already repented her solitary plan. The Baronet felt but the more 
flattered, from supposing this was said from the fear of flattering him.

In the way to the theatre, Camilla, with much confusion, recollected her empty 
purse; but could not, before Mr. and Miss Dennel and Sir Sedley, prevail with 
herself to make it known; she could only determine to ask Mrs. Arlbery to pay 
for her at present, and defer the explanation till night.

But, just as she alighted from the coach, Mrs. Arlbery, in her usual manner, 
said: 'Do pay for me, good Dennel; you know how I hate money.'

Camilla, hurrying after her, whispered, 'May I beg you to lend me some silver?'

'Silver! I have not carried any about with me since I lost my dear ponies and 
my pet phaeton. I am as poor as Job; and therefore bent upon avoiding all 
temptation. Somebody or other always trusts me. If they get paid, they bless 
their stars. If not,—do you hear me, Mr. Dennel?—'twill be all the same an 
hundred years hence; so what man of any spirit will think of it? hey, Mr. 
Dennel?'

'But—dear madam!—pray—'

'O, they'll change for you, here, my dear, without difficulty.'

'But ... but ... pray stop!... I ... I have no gold neither!'

'Have you done like me, then, come out without your purse?'

'No!...'

This single negative, and the fluttered manner, and low voice in which it was 
pronounced, gave Mrs. Arlbery the utmost astonishment. She said nothing, 
however, but called aloud to Mr. Dennel to settle for the whole party.

Mr. Dennel, during the dialogue, had paid for himself and his daughter, and 
walked on into the box.

'What a Hottentot!' exclaimed Mrs. Arlbery. 'Come, then, Clarendel, take pity 
on two poor distressed objects, and let us pass.'

Sir Sedley, little suspicious of the truth, yet flattered to be always called 
upon to be the banker of Camilla, obeyed with alacrity.

Mrs. Arlbery placed Camilla upon a seat before her, and motioned to the Baronet 
to remain in a row above; and then, in a low voice, said: 'My dear Clarendel, 
do you know they have let that poor girl come to Tunbridge without a sixpence 
in her pocket!'

'Is it possible?'

''Tis a fact. I never suspected it till suspicion was followed by confirmation. 
She had a guinea or two, I fancy, at first, just to equip her with one set of 
things to appear in; which, probably, the good Parson imagined would last as 
clean and as long at a public place as at his parsonage-house, where my best 
suit is worn about twice in a summer. But how that rich old uncle of hers could 
suffer her to come without a penny, I can neither account for nor forgive. I 
have seen her shyness about money-matters for some days past; but I so little 
conjectured the possibility of her distress, that I have always rather 
increased than spared it.'

'Sweet little angel!' exclaimed the Baronet, in a tone of tenderness; 'I had 
indeed no idea of her situation. Heavens! I could lay half my fortune at her 
feet to set her at ease!'

'Half, my dear Clarendel!' cried Mrs. Arlbery, laughing; 'nay, why not the 
whole? where will you find a more lovely companion?'

'Pho, pho!—but why should it be so vastly horrid an incongruity that a man 
who, by chance, is rich, should do something for a woman who, by chance, is 
poor? How immensely impertinent is the prejudice that forbids so natural a use 
of money! why should the better half of a man's actions be always under the 
dominion of some prescriptive slavery? 'Tis hideous to think of. And how could 
he more delectably spend, or more ecstatically enjoy his fortune, than by so 
equitable a participation?'

'True, Sir Sedley. And you men are all so disinterested, so pure in your 
benevolence, so free from any spirit of encroachment, that no possible ill 
consequence could ensue from such an arrangement. When once a fair lady had 
made you a civil courtesy, you would wholly forget you had ever obliged her. 
And you would let her walk her ways, and forget it also: especially if, by 
chance, she happened to be young and pretty.'

This raillery was interrupted by the appearance of Edgar in an opposite box. 
'Ah!' cried Mrs. Arlbery, 'look but at that piece of congelation that nothing 
seems to thaw! Enter the lists against him, dear Clarendel! He has stationed 
himself there merely to watch and discountenance her. I hate him heartily; yet 
he rolls in wealth, and she has nothing. I must bring them, therefore, 
together, positively: for though a husband ... such a fastidious one especially 
... is not what I would recommend to her for happiness, 'tis better than 
poverty. And, after his cold and selfish manner, I am convinced he loves her. 
He is evidently in pursuit of her, though he wants generosity to act openly. 
Work him but with a little jealousy, and you will find me right.'

'Me, my dear madam? me, my divine Mrs. Arlbery? Alas! with what chance? No! see 
where enters the gallant Major. Thence must issue those poignant darts that 
newly vivify the expiring embers of languishing love.'

'Now don't talk such nonsense when I am really serious. You are the very man 
for the purpose: because, though you have no feeling, Mandlebert does not know 
you are without it. But those Officers are too notoriously unmeaning to excite 
a moment's real apprehension. They have a new dulcinea wherever they newly 
quarter, and carry about the few ideas they possess from damsel to damsel, as 
regularly as from town to town.'

The Major was now in the box, and the conversation ended.

He endeavoured, as usual, to monopolize Camilla; but while her thoughts were 
all upon Edgar, the whole she could command of her attention was bestowed upon 
Sir Sedley.

This was not unobserved by Edgar, who now again wavered in believing she loved 
the Major: but the doubt brought with it no pleasure; it led him only the more 
to contemn her. Does she turn, thought he, thus, from one to the other, with no 
preference but of accident or caprice? Is her favour thus light of circulation? 
Is it now the mawkish Major, and now the coxcomb Clarendel? Already is she thus 
versed in the common dissipation of coquetry?... O, if so, how blest has been 
my escape! A coquette wife!...

His heart swelled, and his eye no longer sought her.

At night, as soon as she went to her own room, Mrs. Arlbery followed her, and 
said: 'My dear Miss Tyrold, I know much better than you how many six-pences and 
three-pences are perpetually wanted at places such as these. Do suffer me to be 
your banker. What shall we begin our account with?'

Camilla felt really thankful for being spared an opening upon this subject. She 
consented to borrow two guineas; but Mrs. Arlbery would not leave her with less 
than five, adding, 'I insist upon doubling it in a day or two. Never mind what 
I say about my distress, and my phaeton, and my ponies; 'tis only to torment 
Dennel, who trembles at parting with half-a-crown for half an hour; or else, 
now and then, to set other people a staring; which is not unamusing, when 
nothing else is going forward. But believe me, my dear young friend, were I 
really in distress, or were I really not to discharge these petty debts I 
incur, you would soon discover it by the thinness of our parties! These men 
that now so flock around us; would find some other loadstone. I know them 
pretty well, dear creatures!...'

Though shocked to appear thus destitute, Camilla was somewhat relieved to have 
no debt but with Mrs. Arlbery; for she resolved to pay Sir Sedley and the 
milliner the next day, and to settle with Mrs. Arlbery upon her return to 
Etherington.
