
Traits of Instruction

The sixth and last week destined for the Tunbridge sojourn was begun, when Mrs. 
Arlbery once more took her fair young guest apart, and intreated her attention 
for one final half hour. The time, she said, was fast advancing in which they 
must return to their respective homes; but she wished to make a full and clear 
representation of the advantages that might be reaped from this excursion, 
before the period for gathering them should be past.

She would forbear, she said, entering again upon the irksome subject of the 
insensibility of Mandlebert, which was, at least, sufficiently glaring to 
prevent any delusion. But she begged leave to speak of what she believed had 
less obviously struck her, the apparent promise of a serious attachment from 
Sir Sedley Clarendel.

Camilla would here instantly have broken up the conversation, but Mrs. Arlbery 
insisted upon being heard.

Why, she asked, should she wilfully destine her youth to a hopeless waste of 
affection, and dearth of all permanent comfort? To sacrifice every 
consideration to the honours of constancy, might be soothing, and even glorious 
in this first season of romance; but a very short time would render it vapid; 
and the epoch of repentance was always at hand to succeed. With the least 
address, or the least genuine encouragement, it was now palpable she might see 
Sir Sedley, and his title and fortune at her feet.

Camilla resentfully interrupted her, disclaiming with Sir Sedley, as with 
everyone else, all possibility of alliance from motives so degrading; and 
persisted, in declaring, that the most moderate subsistence with freedom, would 
be preferable to the most affluent obtained by any mercenary engagement.

Mrs. Arlbery desired her to recollect that Sir Sedley, though rich even to 
splendour, was so young, so gay, so handsome, and so pleasant, that she might 
safely honour him with her hand, yet run no risk of being supposed to have made 
a merely interested alliance. 'I throw out this,' she cried, 'in conclusion, 
for your deepest consideration, but I must press it no further. Sir Sedley is 
evidently charmed with you at present; and his vanity is so potent, and, like 
all vanity, so easily assailable, that the smallest food to it, adroitly 
administered, would secure him your slave for life, and rescue you from the 
antediluvian courtship of a man, who, if he marries at all, is so deliberate in 
his progress, that he must reach his grand climacteric before he can reach the 
altar.'

Far from meditating upon this discourse with any view to following its 
precepts, Camilla found it necessary to call all her original fondness for Mrs. 
Arlbery to her aid, to forgive the plainness of her attack, or the worldliness 
of her notions: and all that rested upon her mind for consideration was, her 
belief in the serious regard of Sir Sedley, which, as she apprehended it to be 
the work of her own designed exertions, she could only think of with contrition.

These ruminations were interrupted by a call down stairs to see a learned 
bullfinch. The Dennels and Sir Sedley were present; she met the eyes of the 
latter with a sensation of shame that quickly deepened her whole face with 
crimson. He did not behold it without emotion, and experienced a strong 
curiosity to define its exact cause.

He addressed himself to her with the most marked distinction; she could 
scarcely answer him; but her manner was even touchingly gentle. Sir Sedley 
could not restrain himself from following her in every motion by his eyes; he 
felt an interest concerning her that surprised him; he began to doubt if it had 
been indifference which caused her late change; her softness helped his vanity 
to recover its tone, and her confusion almost confirmed him that Mrs. Arlbery 
had been mistaken in rallying his failure of rivalry with Mandlebert.

The bird sung various little airs, upon certain words of command, and mounted 
his highest, and descended to his lowest perch; and made whatever evolutions 
were within the circumference of his limited habitation, with wonderful 
precision.

Camilla, however, was not more pleased by his adroitness, than pained to 
observe the severe aspect with which his keeper issued his orders. She inquired 
by what means he had obtained such authority.

The man, with a significant wag of the head, brutally answered, 'By the true 
old way, Miss; I licks him.'

'Lick him!' repeated she, with disgust; 'how is it possible you can beat such a 
poor delicate little creature?'

'O, easy enough, Miss,' replied the man, grinning; 'everything's the better for 
a little beating, as I tells my wife. There's nothing so fine set, Miss, but 
what will bear it, more or less.'

Sir Sedley asked with what he could strike it, that would not endanger its life.

'That's telling, sir!' cried the man, with a sneer; 'howbeit, we've plenty of 
ill luck in the trade. No want of that. For one that I rears, I loses six or 
seven. And sometimes they be so plaguy sulky, they tempt me to give 'em a knock 
a little matter too hard, and then they'll fall you into a fit, like, and go 
off in a twinkle.'

'And how can you have the cruelty,' cried Camilla, indignantly, 'to treat in 
such a manner a poor little inoffensive animal who does not understand what you 
require?'

'O, yes, a does, miss, they knows what I wants as well as I do myself; only 
they're so dead tiresome at being shy. Why now this one here, as does all his 
larning to satisfaction just now, mayhap won't do nothing at all by an hour or 
two. Why sometimes you may pinch 'em to a mummy before you can make 'em budge.'

'Pinch them!' exclaimed she; 'do you ever pinch them?'

'Do I? Ay, miss. Why how do you think one larns them dumb creturs? It don't 
come to 'em natural. They are main dull of themselves. This one as you see here 
would do nothing at all, if he was not afraid of a tweak.'

'Poor unhappy little thing!' cried she! 'I hope, at least, now it has learnt so 
much, its sufferings are over!'

'Yes, yes, he's pretty well off. I always gives him his fill when he's done his 
day's work. But a little squeak now and then in the intrum does 'em no harm. 
They're mortal cunning. One's forced to be pretty tough with 'em.'

'How should I rejoice,' cried Camilla, 'to rescue this one poor unoffending and 
oppressed little animal from such tyranny!' Then, taking out her purse, she 
desired to know what he would have for it.

The man, as a very great favour, said he would take ten guineas; though it 
would be his ruin to part with it, as it was all his livelihood; but he was 
willing to oblige the young lady.

Camilla, with a constrained laugh, but a very natural blush, put up her purse, 
and said: 'Thou must linger on, then, in captivity, thou poor little 
undeserving sufferer, for I cannot help thee!'

Every body protested that ten guineas was an imposition; and the man offered to 
part with it for five.

Camilla, who had imagined it would have cost half a guinea, was now more 
ashamed, because equally incapable to answer such a demand; she declined, 
therefore, the composition, and the man was dismissed.

At night, when she returned to her own room from the play, she saw the little 
bullfinch, reposing in a superb cage, upon her table.

Delighted first, and next perplexed, she flew to Mrs. Arlbery, and inquired 
whence it came.

Mrs. Arlbery was as much amazed as herself.

Questions were then asked of the servants; but none knew, or none would own, 
how the bird became thus situated.

Camilla could not now doubt but Sir Sedley had given this commission to his 
servant, who could easily place the cage in her room, from his constant access 
to the house. She was enchanted to see the little animal relieved from so 
painful a life, but hesitated not a moment in resolving to refuse its 
acceptance.

When Sir Sedley came the next day, she carried it down, and, with a smile of 
open pleasure, thanked him for giving her so much share in his generous 
liberality; and asked if he could take it home with him in his carriage, or, if 
she should send it to his hotel.

Sir Sedley was disappointed, yet felt the propriety of her delicacy and her 
spirit. He did not deny the step he had taken, but told her that having 
hastily, from the truth of reflection her compassion had awakened, ordered his 
servant to follow the man, and buy the bird, he had forgotten, till it arrived, 
his incapability of taking care of it. His valet was as little at home as 
himself, and there was small chance, at an inn, that any maid would so 
carefully watch, as to prevent its falling a prey to the many cats with which 
it was swarming. He hoped, therefore, till their return to Hampshire, she would 
take charge of a little animal that owed its deliverance from slavery to her 
pitying comments.

Camilla, instinctively, would with unfeigned joy, have accepted such a trust: 
but she thought she saw something archly significant in the eye of Mrs. 
Arlbery, and therefore stammered out, she was afraid she should herself be too 
little at home to secure its safety.

Sir Sedley, looking extremely blank, said, it would be better to re-deliver it 
to the man, brute as he was, than to let it be unprotected; but, where 
generosity touched Camilla, reflection ever flew her; and off all guard at such 
an idea, she exclaimed she would rather relinquish going out again while at 
Tunbridge, than render his humanity abortive; and ran off precipitately with 
the bird to her chamber.

Mrs. Arlbery, soon following, praised her behaviour; and said, she had sent the 
Baronet away perfectly happy.

Camilla, much provoked, would now have had the bird conveyed after him; but 
Mrs. Arlbery assured her, inconsistency in a woman was as flattering, as in a 
man it was tedious and alarming; and persuaded her to let the matter rest.

Her mind, however, did not rest at the same time: in the evening, when the 
Baronet met them at the Rooms, he was not only unusually gay, but looked at her 
with an air and manner that seemed palpably to mark her as the cause of his 
satisfaction.

In the deepest disturbance, she considered herself now to be in a difficulty 
the most delicate; she could not come forward to clear it up, without 
announcing expectations from his partiality which he had never authorised by 
any declaration; nor yet suffer such symptoms of his believing it welcome to 
pass unnoticed, without risking the reproach of using him ill, when she made 
known, at a later period, her indifference.

Mrs. Arlbery would not aid her, for she thought the embarrassment might lead to 
a termination the most fortunate. To consult with Edgar was her first wish; but 
how open such a subject? The very thought, however, gave her an air of 
solicitude when he spoke to her, that struck him, and he watched for an 
opportunity to say, 'You have not, I hope, forgotten my province?... May I, in 
my permitted office, ask a few questions?'

'O, yes!' cried she, with alacrity; 'And, when they are asked, and when I have 
answered them, if you should not be too much tired, may I ask some in my turn?'

'Of me!' cried he, with the most gratified surprise.

'Not concerning yourself!' answered she, blushing; 'but upon something which a 
little distresses me.'

'When, and where may it be?' cried he, while a thousand conjectures rapidly 
succeeded to each other; 'may I call upon Mrs. Arlbery to-morrow morning?'

'O, no! we shall be, I suppose, here again at night,' she answered; dreading 
arranging a visit Mrs. Arlbery would treat, she knew, with raillery the most 
unmerciful.

There was time for no more, as that lady, suddenly tired, led the way to the 
carriage. Edgar followed her to the door, hoping and fearing, at once, every 
thing that was most interesting from a confidence so voluntary and so 
unexpected.

Camilla was still more agitated; for though uncertain if she were right or 
wrong in the appeal she meant to make, to converse with him openly, to be 
guided by his counsel, and to convince him of her superiority to all mercenary 
allurements were pleasures to make her look forward to the approaching 
conference with almost trembling delight.
