
A Council

The next morning, Camilla, eager to try once more her influence with her 
brother, accompanied him into the park, and renewed her remonstrances, but with 
no better success; and while they were passing by a private gate, that opened 
to the high road, they saw Sir Sedley Clarendel driving by in his phaeton.

Lionel, bursting from his sister, opened the gate, called to Sir Sedley to give 
his reins to one of his servants, and brought him, not unwilling, though much 
surprised, into the park.

Camilla, in dismay unspeakable at this conduct, and the idea of such a meeting, 
had run forward instantly to hide herself in the summer-house, to avoid 
re-passing the gate in her way to the mansion; but her scheme was more 
precipitate than wise; Lionel caught a glimpse of her gown as she went into the 
little building, and shouted aloud: 'Look! look! Sir Sedley! there's Camilla 
making believe to run away from you!'

'Ah, fair fugitive!' cried the baronet, springing forward, and entering the 
summer-house almost as soon as herself, 'fly only thus, where you may be 
pursued!'

Camilla, utterly confounded, knew not where to cast her eyes, where to hide her 
face; and her quick-changing colour, and short-heaved breath, manifested an 
excess of confusion, that touched, flattered, and penetrated the baronet so 
deeply and so suddenly, as to put him off from all guard of consequences, and 
all recollection of matrimonial distaste: 'Beautiful, resistless Camilla!' he 
cried; 'how vain is it to struggle against your witchery! Assure me but of your 
clemency, and I will adore the chains that shackle me!'

Camilla, wholly overcome, by sorrow, gratitude, repentance, and shame, sunk 
upon a chair, and shed a torrent of tears that she even sought not to restrain. 
The shock of refusing one, to whose error in believing himself acceptable she 
had largely contributed, or the horror of yielding to him her hand, while her 
heart was in the possession of another, made her almost wish, at this moment, 
he should divine her distress, that his own pride might conclude it.

But far different from what would produce such an effect, were the feelings of 
pride now working in his bosom. He imagined her emotion had its source in 
causes the softest and most flattering. Every personal obstacle sunk before 
this idea, and with a seriousness in his manner he had not yet used: 'This 
evening, lovely Camilla,' he cried, 'let me beg, for this evening, the audience 
accorded me upon that which I lost at Tunbridge.'

He was then going; but Camilla, hastily rising, cried, 'Sir Sedley, I beseech 
...' when Lionel capering into the little apartment, danced round it in mad 
ecstasy, chanting 'Lady Clarendel, Lady Clarendel, my dear Lady Clarendel!'

Camilla now was not confused alone. Sir Sedley himself could gladly have pushed 
him out of the building; but neither the looks of surprise and provocation of 
the baronet, nor the prayers nor reprimands of Camilla, could tame his wild 
transport. He shook hands, whether he would or not, with the one; he bowed most 
obsequiously, whether she would regard him or not, to the other; and still 
chanting the same burden, made a clamour that shook the little edifice to its 
foundation.

The strong taste for ridicule, that was a prominent part of the character of 
Sir Sedley, was soon conquered by this ludicrous behaviour, and both his 
amazement and displeasure ended in a hearty fit of laughter. But Camilla 
suffered too severely to join in the mirth; she blushed for her brother, she 
blushed for herself, she hung her head in speechless shame, and covered her 
eyes with her hand.

The noisy merriment of Lionel preventing any explanation, though rendering it 
every moment more necessary, Sir Sedley, repeating his request for the evening, 
took leave.

Camilla looked upon his departing in this manner as her sentence to misery, and 
was pursuing him, to decline the visit; but Lionel, seizing her two hands, 
swung her round the room, in defiance of her even angry expostulations and 
sufferings, which he neither credited nor conceived, and then skipt after the 
baronet himself, who was already out of the park.

She became now nearly frantic. She thought herself irretrievably in the power 
of Sir Sedley, and by means so forced and indelicate, that she was scarcely 
more afflicted at the event, than shocked by its circumstances; and though 
incapable to really harbour rancour against a brother she sincerely loved, she 
yet believed at this moment she never should forgive, nor willingly see him 
more.

In this state she was found by Lavinia. The history was inarticulately told, 
but Lavinia could give only her pity; she saw not any avenue to an honourable 
retreat, and thought, like Eugenia, she could now only free herself by the 
breach of what should be dearer to her even than happiness, her probity and 
honour.

Utterly inconsolable she remained, till again she heard the voice of Lionel, 
loudly singing in the park.

'Go to him! go to him! my dearest Lavinia,' she cried, 'and, if my peace is 
dear to you, prevail with him to clear up the mistakes of Sir Sedley, and to 
prevent his dreaded, killing visit this evening!'

Lavinia only answered by compliance; but, after an half hour's useless contest 
with her riotous brother, returned to her weeping sister, not merely 
successless with regard to her petition, but loaded with fresh ill tidings that 
she knew not how to impart. Lionel had only laughed at the repugnance of 
Camilla, which he regarded as something between childishness and affectation, 
and begged Lavinia to be wiser than to heed to it: 'Brother Sedley has desired 
me, however,' he added, 'not to speak of the matter to Numps nor my father, 
till he has had a little more conversation with his charmer; and he intends to 
call to-night as if only upon a visit to me.'

When Camilla learnt, at length, this painful end of her embassy, she gave 
herself up so completely to despair, that Lavinia, affrighted, ran to the house 
for Eugenia, whose extreme youth was no impediment, in the minds of her liberal 
sisters, to their belief nor reverence of her superior wisdom. Her species of 
education had early prepossessed them with respect for her knowledge, and her 
unaffected fondness for study, had fixed their opinion of her extraordinary 
understanding. The goodness of her heart, the evenness of her temper, and her 
natural turn to contemplation, had established her character alike for sanctity 
and for philosophy throughout the family.

She listened with the sincerest commiseration to the present state of the case: 
'Certainly,' she cried, 'you cannot, in honour, now refuse him; but deal with 
him sincerely, and he may generously himself relinquish his claims. Write to 
him, my dear Camilla; tell him you grieve to afflict, yet disdain to deceive 
him; assure him of your perfect esteem and eternal gratitude; but confess, at 
once, your heart refuses to return his tenderness. Entreat him to forgive 
whatever he may have mistaken, and nobly to restore to you the liberty of which 
your obligations, without his consent, must rob you.'

To Lavinia this advice appeared infallible; but Camilla, though she felt an 
entanglement which fettered herself, thought it by no means sufficiently direct 
or clear to authorise a rejection of Sir Sedley; since, strangely as she seemed 
in his power, circumstances had placed her there, and not his own solicitation.

Yet to prevent a visit of which her knowledge seemed consent, and which her 
consent must be most seriously to authorise, she deemed as indispensable to her 
character, as to her fears. She hesitated, therefore, not a moment in 
preferring writing to a meeting; and after various conversations, and various 
essays, the following billet was dispatched to Clarendel Place, through the 
means of Molly Mill, and by her friend Tommy Hodd.

To Sir Sedley Clarendel.

I should ill return what I owe to Sir Sedley Clarendel by causing him any 
useless trouble I can spare him. He spoke of a visit hither this evening, when 
I was too much hurried to represent that it could not be received, as my 
brother's residence is at Etherington, and my father and my uncle have not the 
honour to be known to Sir Sedley. For me, my gratitude must ever be 
unalterable; and where accident occasions a meeting, I shall be most happy to 
express it; but I have nothing to say, nothing to offer, that could recompense 
one moment of Sir Sedley's time given voluntarily to such a visit.

Camilla Tyrold.

Ill as this letter satisfied her, she could devise nothing better; but though 
her sisters had both thought it too rigorous, she would not risk anything 
gentler.

During the dinner, they all appeared absent and dejected; but Sir Hugh 
attributed it to the non-arrival of Clermont, in watching for whom his own time 
was completely occupied, by examining two weather-cocks, and walking from one 
to the other, to see if they agreed, or how they changed; Indiana was wholly 
engrossed in consultations with Miss Margland, upon the most becoming dress for 
a bride's maid; and Mr. Tyrold, having observed that his three girls had spent 
the morning together, concluded Camilla had divulged to them her unhappy 
perplexity, and felt soothed himself in considering she had soothers so 
affectionate and faithful.

Early in the evening Tommy Hodd arrived, and Molly Mill brought Camilla the 
following answer of Sir Sedley.

Miss Camilla Tyrold.

Ah! what in this lower sphere can be unchequered, when even a correspondence 
with the most lovely of her sex, brings alarm with its felicity? Must I come, 
then, to Cleves, fair Insensible, but as a visitor to Mr. Lionel? Have you 
taken a captive only to see him in fetters? Allured a victim merely to behold 
him bleed? Ah! tomorrow, at least, permit the audience that to-day is denied, 
and at your feet, let your slave receive his doom.

Sedley Clarendel.

Camilla turned cold. She shrunk from a remonstrance she conceived she had 
merited, and regarded herself to be henceforth either culpable or unhappy. 
Unacquainted with the feminine indulgence which the world, by long 
prescription, grants to coquetry, its name was scarcely known to her; and she 
saw in its own native egotism the ungenerous desire to please, where she 
herself was indifferent, and anticipated from Sir Sedley reproach, if not 
contempt. No sophistications of custom had warped the first innocence of her 
innate sense of right, and to trifle with the feelings of another for any 
gratification of her own, made success bring a blush to her integrity, not 
exultation to her vanity.

The words victim and bleeding, much affected the tender Lavinia, while those of 
fetters, captive, and insensible, satisfied the heroic Eugenia that Sir Sedley 
deserved the hand of her sister; but neither of them spoke.

'You say nothing?' cried Camilla, turning paler and paler, and sitting down 
lest she should fall.

They both wept and embraced her, and Eugenia said, if, indeed, she could not 
conquer her aversion, she saw no way to elude the baronet, but by openly 
confessing her repugnance, in the conversation he demanded.

Camilla saw not less strongly the necessity of being both prompt and explicit; 
but how receive Sir Sedley at Cleves? and upon what pretence converse with him 
privately? Even Lionel the next day was to return to the university, though his 
presence, if he staid, would, in all probability, but add to every difficulty.

At length, they decided, that the conference should take place at the Grove; 
and to prevent the threatened visit of the next day, Camilla wrote the 
following answer:

To Sir Sedley Clarendel.

I should be grieved, indeed, to return my obligations to Sir Sedley Clarendel 
by meriting his serious reproach; yet I cannot have the honour of seeing him at 
Cleves, since my brother is immediately quitting it for Oxford. As soon as I 
hear Mrs. Arlbery is again at the Grove, I shall wait upon her, and always be 
most happy to assure Sir Sedley of my gratitude, which will be as lasting as it 
is sincere.

Camilla Tyrold.

Though wretched in this strange state of things, she knew not how to word her 
letter more positively, since his own, notwithstanding its inferences, had so 
much more the style of florid gallantry than plain truth. Molly Mill undertook 
that Tommy Hodd should carry it early the next morning.

Lionel was so enraged at the non-appearance of the young baronet at night, that 
Camilla was compelled to confess she had promised to see him, and to give him 
his answer at Mrs. Arlbery's. He was out of humour, nevertheless, lest Sir 
Sedley should be affronted by the delay, and feared that the best match in the 
whole county would prove abortive, from his sister's foolish trimmings, and 
silly ignorance of life.
