
A Bull-Dog

Sir Hugh called upon his other nieces to join him; purposing to stroll to the 
end of a lane which led to the London road.

Camilla accompanied the party in the most mournful silence. The assuming letter 
she had received; the interview she should have to sustain; and her apparent 
dependance upon Sir Sedley, sinking her into complete despondence.

When they came to the high road, Sir Hugh made a stop, and bid every body look 
sharp.

A horseman was seen advancing full gallop. By his figure he appeared to be 
young; by his pace, in uncommon speed.

'That's him,' cried Sir Hugh, striking his stick upon the ground, and smiling 
most complacently; 'I said he would not mind the wind, my dear Eugenia! what's 
the wind, or the waves either, to a lover? which is a thing, however, that I 
won't talk about; so don't be ashamed, my dear girl, nobody knowing what we 
mean.'

Eugenia looked down, deeply colouring, and much regretting the lameness that 
prevented her running back, to avoid so public and discountenancing a meeting.

The horseman now came up to them, and was preparing to turn down the lane; 
when, all at once, they perceived him to be Edgar Mandlebert.

He had left Tunbridge in a manner not more abrupt than comfortless. His 
disappointment in the failure of Camilla at the Rooms had been as bitter, as 
his expectations from the promised conference had been animated. When Lionel 
appeared, he inquired if his sister were absent from illness.... No; she was 
only writing a letter. To take this moment for such a purpose, be the letter 
what it might, seemed sporting with his curiosity and warm interest in her 
affairs: and he went back, mortified and dejected, to his lodgings; where, just 
arrived by the stage, he found a letter from Dr. Marchmont, acquainting him 
with his return to his rectory. In this suspensive state of mind, to cast 
himself upon his sagacious friend seemed a relief the most desirable: but, 
while considering whether first to claim from Camilla her promised 
communication, the voice of Lionel issuing from the room of Major Cerwood, 
struck his ears. He darted forth, and accompanied the youth to his horse, who 
was setting out upon some expedition, in the dark; and then received 
information, under the pretence of great secrecy, that Major Cerwood was going 
immediately to ask leave of absence, and proceed straight to Hampshire, with 
his final proposals of marriage with Camilla. He now concluded this was the 
subject upon which she had meant to consult with him; but delicacy, pride, and 
hope all combated his interference. He determined even to avoid her, till the 
answer should be given. 'I must owe her hand,' cried he, 'to her heart, not to 
a contest such as this: and, if impartially and unbiassed, the Major is 
refused, no farther cruel doubt, no torturing hesitation, shall keep me another 
minute from her feet!' With the dawn, therefore, he set out for Hampshire; but, 
fixed to avoid Cleves, till he could learn that the Major's visit were over, he 
devoted his mornings to rides, and his evenings to Dr. Marchmont, till now, a 
mile or two from the Park, he had met the Major himself, and concluded the 
acceptance or the rejection decided. They merely touched their hats as they 
passed each other; and he instantly took the route which the Major was quitting.

In the excess of his tribulation, he was galloping past the whole group, 
without discerning one of its figures; when Sir Hugh called out, 'Why it's 
young Mr. Edgar! So now we've walked all this way for nothing! and Clermont may 
be still at Jericho, or at Rome, for anything we know to the contrary!'

Edgar stopt short. He felt himself shiver at sight of Camilla, but dismounted, 
gave his horse to his groom, and joined the party.

Eugenia recovering, now fearlessly looked up; but Camilla, struck and affected, 
shook in every limb, and was forced to hold by Lavinia.

Edgar called upon his utmost presence of mind to carry him through what he 
conceived to be a final trial. He spoke to Sir Hugh, and compelled himself to 
speak separately to every one else; but, when he addressed Camilla, to whom he 
said something not very distinctly, about Tunbridge, she curtsied to him 
slightly, and turned away, without making any answer. Her mind, taking suddenly 
a quick retrospection of all that had passed between them, presented him to her 
view as uncertain and delusive; and, casting upon him, internally, the whole 
odium of her present distress, and her feelings were so indignant, that, in her 
present desperate state, she deemed it beneath her to disguise them, either 
from himself or the world.

Edgar, to whose troubled imagination everything painted his rival, concluded 
the Major had been heard with favour; and his own adverse counsel was now 
recollected with resentment.

Sir Hugh, far more fatigued by his disappointment than by his walk, said he 
should go no further, as he found it in vain to expect Clermont; and accepted 
the arm of Edgar to aid his stick in helping him home.

Camilla, still leaning upon Lavinia, mounted a little bank, which she knew Sir 
Hugh could not ascend, that she might walk on where Edgar could not join her; 
involuntarily ejaculating, 'Lavinia! if you would avoid deceit and treachery, 
look at a man as at a picture, which tells you only the present moment! Rely 
upon nothing of time to come! They are not like us, Lavinia. They think 
themselves free, if they have made no verbal profession; though they may have 
pledged themselves by looks, by actions, by attentions, and by manners, a 
thousand, and a thousand times!'

Edgar observed her avoidance with the keenest apprehension; and, connecting it 
with her failure at the Rooms, imagined the Major had now influenced her to an 
utter aversion of him.

Sir Hugh meanwhile, though wholly unheard, related, in a low voice, to Edgar, 
the history of his preparations for Clermont; begging him, however, to take no 
notice of them to Eugenia: and, then, adding, 'Very likely, Mr. Edgar, you are 
just come from Tunbridge? and, if so, you may have met with that young Captain 
that has been with us this morning; who, I understand to be a Major?'

Edgar was thrown into the utmost trepidation; the artless openness of Sir Hugh 
gave him every reason to suppose he should immediately gather full 
intelligence, and all his peace and all his hopes might hang upon another word. 
He could only bow to the question; but before Sir Hugh could go on, a butcher's 
boy, who was riding by, from a wanton love of mischief, gave a signal to his 
attending bull-dog, to attack the old spaniel that accompanied Sir Hugh.

Sustained by his master many a year, the proud old favourite, though unequal to 
the combat, disdained to fly; and the fierce bull-dog would presently have 
demolished him, had not Edgar, recovering all his vigour from his earnest 
desire to rescue an animal so dear to Sir Hugh, armed himself with the 
baronet's stick, and thrust it dexterously across the jaws of this intended 
antagonist.

Nothing, however, could withstand the fangs of the bull-dog; they soon severed 
it, and, again, he made at the spaniel; but Edgar rushed between them, with no 
other weapons than the broken fragments of the stick: and, while the baronet 
and Eugenia screamed out to old Rover to return to them, and Lavinia, with more 
readiness of common sense, exerted the fullest powers of which her gentle voice 
was capable, to conjure the wicked boy to call off his dog, Camilla, who was 
the last to look round at this scene, only turned about as the incensed and 
disappointed bull-dog, missing his object, aimed at Edgar himself. Roused at 
once from her sullen calm to the most agonising sensibility, every thing and 
every body, herself most of all, were forgotten in the sight of his danger; 
and, with a piercing shriek, she darted down the bank, and arrived at the 
tremendous spot, at the same instant that the more useful exhortations of 
Lavinia, had induced the boy to withdraw the fierce animal; who, with all his 
might, and all his fury, obeyed the weak whistle of a little urchin he had been 
bred to love and respect, for bringing him his daily food.

Camilla perceived not if the danger were impending, or over; gasping, pale, and 
agitated, she caught Mandlebert by the arm, and, in broken accents, half 
pronounced, 'O Edgar!... are you hurt?'

The revulsion that had operated in her mind took now its ample turn in that of 
Mandlebert; he could hardly trust his senses, hardly believe he existed; yet he 
felt the pressure of her hand upon his arm, and saw in her countenance terror 
the most undisguised, and tenderness that went straight to his soul. 'Is it 
Camilla,' he cried, 'who thus speaks to me?... Is not my safety or my 
destruction alike indifferent to Camilla?'

'O no! O no!' cried she, scarce conscious she answered at all, till called to 
recollection by his own changed looks; changed from incredulity and amazement 
to animation that lightened up every feature, to eyes that shot fire. Abashed, 
astonished, ashamed, she precipitately drew away her hand, and sought quietly 
to retire.

But Edgar was no longer master of himself; he conceived he was on a pinnacle, 
whence he could only, and without any gradation, turn to happiness or despair. 
He followed her, trembling and uncertain, his joy fading into alarm at her 
retreat, his hope transforming into apprehension at her resumed coldness of 
demeanor. 'Do you repent,' he cried, 'that you have shewn me a little 
humanity?... will the Major ... the happy Major!... be offended you do less 
than detest me?'

'The Major!' repeated she, looking back, surprised, 'can you think the Major 
has any influence with me?'

'Ah, Heaven!' he cried, 'what do you say!...'

Enchanted, affrighted, bewildered, yet silent, she hurried on; Edgar could not 
forget himself more than a moment; he forbore, therefore, to follow, and, 
though with a self-denial next to torture, returned to Sir Hugh, to whom his 
arm was doubly necessary, from the scene he had just witnessed, and the loss of 
his stick.

The butcher's boy and his bull-dog were decamped; and the baronet and Eugenia 
were rivalling each other in fondling the rescued spaniel, and in pouring 
thanks and praise unlimited upon Edgar.

They then walked back as before; and, as soon as they re-entered the mansion, 
the female party went upstairs, and Sir Hugh, warmly shaking Edgar by the hand, 
said: 'My dear Mr. Edgar, this is one of the happiest days of my life, except 
just that of my nephew's coming over, which it is but right to put before it. 
But here, first, my dear Camilla's refused that young Captain, who would have 
carried her the Lord knows where, immediately, as I make no doubt; and next, 
I've saved the life of my poor old Rover, by the means of your good-nature.'

'Refused?' cried Edgar; 'my dear Sir Hugh!—did you say refused?'

Sir Hugh innocently gratified him with the repetition of the word, but begged 
him not to mention it, 'For fear,' he said, 'it should hurt the young man when 
he falls in love somewhere else; which I heartily hope he will do soon, poor 
gentleman! for the sake of its not fretting him.'

'Miss Camilla, then, has refused him?' again repeated Edgar, with a countenance 
that, to any man but the baronet, must have betrayed his whole soul.

'Yes, poor gentleman! this very morning; for which I am thankful enough: for 
what do we know of those young officers, who may all be sent to the East 
Indies, or Jamaica, every day of their lives? Not but what I have the proper 
pity for him, which, I hope, is all that can be expected.'

Edgar walked about the room, in a perturbation of hope, fear, and joy, that 
disabled him from all further appearance of attention. He wished to relate this 
transaction to Dr. Marchmont, yet dreaded any retarding advice; he languished 
to make Camilla herself the sole mistress of his destiny: the interest she had 
shewn for his safety seemed to admit but one interpretation; and, finally, he 
resolved to stay at Cleves till he could meet with her alone.

Camilla had not uttered a word after the adventure of the bull-dog. The 
smallest idea that she could excite the least emotion in Edgar, brought a 
secret rapture to her heart, that, at any former period, would alone have 
sufficed to render her happy: but, at this instant of entanglement with 
another, she revolted from the indulgence of such pleasure; and instead of 
dwelling, as she would have done before, on the look, the accent, the manner, 
that were susceptible, by any construction, of partiality, she checked every 
idea that did not represent Edgar as unstable and consistent; and sought, with 
all her power, to regard him as Mrs. Arlbery had painted him, and to believe 
him, except in a few casual moments of caprice, insensible and hard of heart.

Yet this entanglement, in which, scarce knowing how, she now seemed to be 
entwined with Sir Sedley, grew more and more terrific; and when she considered 
that her sisters themselves thought her independence gone, and her honour 
engaged, she was seized with so much wonderment, how it had all been brought 
about, that her understanding seemed to play her false, and she believed the 
whole a dream.
