
An Oak Tree

When the sisters were summoned down stairs to dinner, planted at the door, 
ready to receive them at their entrance, stood Edgar. Lavinia and Eugenia 
addressed him as usual; but Camilla could not speak, could not return his 
salutation, could not look at him. She sat hastily down in her accustomed place 
by her uncle, and even the presence of her father scarcely restrained her 
tears, as she contrasted the hopeless uncertainties of Edgar, with the perilous 
pursuit of Sir Sedley.

Edgar, for the first time, saw her avoidance without suspecting that it flowed 
from repugnance. The interest she had shewn for his safety was still bounding 
in his breast, and as, from time to time, he stole a glance at her, and 
observed her emotion, his heart whispered him the softest hopes, that soon the 
most perfect confidence would make every feeling reciprocal.

But these hopes were not long without alloy; he soon discerned something that 
far exceeded what could give him pleasure in her perturbation; he read in it 
not merely hurry and alarm, but suffering and distress.

He now ventured to look at her no more; his confidence gave place to pity; he 
saw she was unhappy, and breathed no present wish but to relieve and console 
her.

When the dessert was served, she was preparing to retire; but she caught the 
eye of her father, and saw she should not long be alone; she re-seated herself, 
therefore, in haste, to postpone, at least, his scrutiny.

Every body, at length, arose, and Sir Hugh proposed that they should all walk 
in the park, during his nap, but keep close to the pales, that they might 
listen for all passengers, in case of Clermont's coming.

To this, also, Camilla could make no objection, and they set out. She took an 
arm of each sister, and indulged the heaviness of her heart in not uttering a 
word.

They had not gone far, when a servant ran after Mr. Tyrold with a pacquet, just 
arrived, by a private hand, from Lisbon. He returned to read it in his own 
room; Lavinia and Eugenia accompanied him to hear its contents, and Camilla, 
for the first time, seemed the least affectionate of his daughters; she durst 
not encounter him but in the mixt company of all the house; she told Lavinia to 
make haste back with the news, and took the arm of Indiana.

The compulsion of uninteresting discourse soon became intolerable; and no 
longer chained to the party by the awe of her father, she presently left 
Indiana to Miss Margland, and perceiving that Edgar was conversing with Dr. 
Orkborne, said she would wait for her sisters; and, turning a little aside, sat 
down upon a bench under a large oak.

Here her painful struggle and unwilling forbearance ended; she gave free vent 
to her tears, and thought herself the most wretched of human beings; she found 
her heart, her aching heart, more than ever devoted to Mandlebert, filled with 
his image, revering his virtues, honouring even his coldness, from a persuasion 
she deserved not his affection, and sighing solely for the privilege to consign 
herself to his remembrance for life, though unknown to himself, and unsuspected 
by the world. The very idea of Sir Sedley was horror to her; she felt guilty to 
have involved herself in an intercourse so fertile of danger; she thought over, 
with severest repentance, her short, but unjustifiable deviation from that 
transparent openness, and undesigning plainness of conduct, which her 
disposition as much as her education ought to have rendered unchangeable. To 
that, alone, was owing all her actual difficulty, for to that alone was owing 
her own opinion of any claim upon her justice. How dearly, she cried, do I now 
pay for the unthinking plan with which I risked the peace of another, for the 
re-establishment of my own! She languished to throw herself into the arms of 
her father, to unbosom to him all her errors and distresses, and owe their 
extrication to his wisdom and kindness. She was sure he would be unmoved by the 
glare of a brilliant establishment, and that far from desiring her to sacrifice 
her feelings to wealth and shew, he would himself plead against the alliance 
when he knew the state of her mind, and recommend to her, so circumstanced, the 
single life, in the true spirit of Christian philosophy and moderation: but all 
was so closely interwoven in the affairs and ill conduct of her brother, that 
she believed herself engaged in honour to guard the fatal secret, though 
hazarding by its concealment impropriety and misery.

These afflicting ruminations were at length interrupted by the sound of feet; 
she took her handkerchief from her eyes, expecting to see her sisters; she was 
mistaken, and beheld Mandlebert.

She started and rose; she strove to chace the tears from her eyes without 
wiping them, and asked what he had done with Dr. Orkborne?

'You are in grief!' cried he in a tone of sympathy; 'some evil has befallen 
you!... let me ask....'

'No; I am only waiting for my sisters. They have just received letters from 
Lisbon.'

'You have been weeping! you are weeping now! why do you turn away from me? I 
will not obtrusively demand your confidence ... yet, could I give you the most 
distant idea what a weight it might remove from my mind, ... you would find it 
difficult to deny yourself the pleasure of doing so much good!'

The tears of Camilla now streamed afresh. Words so kind from Edgar, the cold, 
the hard-hearted Edgar, surprised and overset her; yet she endeavoured to hide 
her face, and made an effort to pass him.

'Is not this a little unkind?' cried he, gravely; 'however, I have no claim to 
oppose you.'

'Unkind!' she repeated, and involuntarily turning to him, shewed a countenance 
so disconsolate, that he lost his self-control, and taking her reluctant hand, 
said: 'O Camilla! torture me no longer!'

Almost transfixed with astonishment, she looked at him for a moment in a 
speechless wonder; but the interval of doubt was short; the character of Edgar, 
for unalienable steadiness, unalterable honour, was fixed in her mind, like 
'truths from holy writ,' and she knew, with certainty incontrovertible, that 
his fate was at her disposal, from the instant he acknowledged openly her power 
over his feelings.

Every opposite sensation, that with violence the most ungovernable could 
encounter but to combat, now met in her bosom, elevating her to rapture, 
harrowing her with terror, menacing even her understanding. The most exquisite 
wish of her heart seemed accorded at a period so nearly too late for its 
acceptance, that her faculties, bewildered, confused, deranged, lost the 
capacity of clearly conceiving if still she were a free agent or not.

He saw her excess of disorder with alarm; he sought to draw her again to her 
seat; but she put her hand upon her forehead, and leant it against the bark of 
the tree.

'You will not speak to me!' cried he; 'you will not trust me! shall I call you 
cruel? No! for you are not aware of the pain you inflict, the anguish you make 
me suffer! the generosity of your nature would else, unbidden, impulsively 
interfere.'

'You suffer! you!' cried she, again distressfully, almost incredulously, 
looking at him, while her hands were uplifted with amazement: 'I thought you 
above any suffering! superior to all calamity!... almost to all feeling!...'

'Ah, Camilla! what thus estranges you from candor? from justice? what is it can 
prompt you to goad thus a heart which almost from its first beating....'

He stopt, desirous to check himself; while penetrated by his softness, and 
ashamed of what, in the bitterness of her spirit, she had pronounced, she again 
melted into tears, and sunk down upon the bench; yet holding out to him one 
hand, while with the other she covered her face: 'Forgive me,' she cried, 'I 
entreat ... for I scarce know what I say.'

Such a speech, and so accompanied, might have demolished the stoicism of an 
older philosopher than Edgar; he fervently kissed her proferred hand, 
exclaiming: 'Forgive you! can Camilla use such a word? has she the slightest 
care for my opinion? the most remote concern for me, or for my happiness?'

'Farewell! farewell!' cried she, hastily drawing away her hand, 'go now, I 
beseech you!'

'What a moment to expect me to depart! O Camilla! my soul sickens of this 
suspence! End it, generous Camilla! beloved as lovely! my heart is all your 
own! use it gently, and accept it nobly!'

Every other emotion, now, in the vanquished Camilla, every retrospective fear, 
every actual regret, yielded to the conquering charm of grateful tenderness; 
and restoring the hand she had withdrawn: 'O Edgar,' she cried, 'how little can 
I merit such a gift! yet I prize it ... far, far beyond all words!'

The agitation of Edgar was, at first, too mighty and too delicious for speech; 
but his eyes, now cast up to heaven, now fixed upon her own, spoke the most 
ardent, yet purest felicity; while her hand, now held to his heart, now pressed 
to his lips, strove vainly to recover its liberty. 'Blest moment!' he at length 
uttered, 'that finishes for every such misery of uncertainty! that gives my 
life to happiness ... my existence to Camilla!'

Again speech seemed too poor for him. Perfect satisfaction is seldom 
loquacious; its character is rather tender than gay; and where happiness 
succeeds abruptly to long solicitude and sorrow, its enjoyment is fearful; it 
softens rather than exhilarates. Sudden joy is sportive, but sudden happiness 
is awful.

The pause, however, that on his side was ecstatic thankfulness, soon became 
mixt, on that of Camilla, with confusion and remorse: Sir Sedley returned to 
her memory, and with him every reflection, and every apprehension, that most 
cruelly could sully each trembling, though nearly gratified hope.

The cloud that so soon dimmed the transient radiance of her countenance, was 
instantly perceived by Edgar; but as he was beginning the most anxious 
inquiries, the two sisters approached, and Camilla, whose hand he then 
relinquished, rushed forward, and throwing her arms around their necks, wept 
upon their bosoms.

'Sweet sisters!' cried Edgar, embracing them all three in one; 'long may ye 
thus endearingly entwine each other, in the sacred links of affectionate 
affinity! Where shall I find our common father?... where is Mr. Tyrold?'

The amazed sisters could with difficulty answer that he was with their uncle, 
to whom he was communicating news from their mother.

Edgar looked tenderly at Camilla, but, perceiving her emotion, forbore to speak 
to her, though he could not deny himself the pleasure of snatching one kiss of 
the hand which hung down upon the shoulder of Eugenia; he then whispered to 
both the sisters: 'You will not, I trust, be my enemies?' and hurried to the 
house.

'What can this mean?' cried Eugenia and Lavinia in a breath.

'It means,' said Camilla, 'that I am the most distressed ... yet the happiest 
of human beings!'

This little speech, began with the deepest sigh, but finished with the most 
refulgent smile, only added to their wonder.

'I hope you have been consulting with Edgar,' said the innocent Eugenia; 
'nobody can more ably advise you, since, in generosity to Lionel, you are 
prohibited from counselling with my father.'

Again the most expressive smiles played in every feature through the tears of 
Camilla, as she turned, with involuntary archness, to Eugenia, and answered: 
'And shall I follow his counsel, my dear sister, if he gives me any?'

'Why not? he is wise, prudent, and much attached to us all. How he can have 
supposed it possible we could be his enemies, is past all divination!'

Gaiety was so truly the native growth of the mind of Camilla, that neither care 
nor affliction could chace it long from its home. The speeches of the 
unsuspicious Eugenia, that a moment before would have past unheeded, now 
regaled her renovated fancy with a thousand amusing images, which so vigorously 
struggled against her sadness and her terrors, that they were soon nearly 
driven from the field by their sportive assailants; and, by the time she 
reached her chamber, whither, lost in amaze, her sisters followed her, the 
surprise she had in store for them, the pleasure with which she knew they would 
sympathise in her happiness, and the security of Edgar's decided regard, had 
liberated her mind from the shackles of reminiscence, and restored her vivacity 
to its original spirit.

Fastening, then, her door, she turned to them with a countenance of the 
brightest animation; alternately and almost wildly embraced them, and related 
the explicit declaration of Edgar; now hiding in their bosoms the blushes of 
her modest joy, now offering up to Heaven the thanksgiving of her artless 
rapture, now dissolving in the soft tears of the tenderest sensibility, 
according to the quick changing impulses of her natural and lively, yet feeling 
and susceptible character. Nor once did she look at the reverse of this darling 
portrait of chosen felicity, till Eugenia, with a gentle sigh, uttered: 
'Unhappy Sir Sedley Clarendel! how may this stroke be softened to him?'

'Ah Eugenia!' she cried; 'that alone is my impediment to the most perfect, the 
most unmixt content! why have you made me think of him?'

'My dear Camilla,' said Eugenia, with a look of curious earnestness, and taking 
both her hands, while she seemed examining her face, 'you are then, it seems, 
in love? and with Edgar Mandlebert?'

Camilla, blushing, yet laughing, broke away from her, denying the charge.

A consultation succeeded upon the method of proceeding with the young baronet. 
Tommy Hodd was not yet returned with the answer; it was five miles to Clarendel 
Place, which made going and returning his day's work. She resolved to wait but 
this one reply, and then to acknowledge to Edgar the whole of her situation. 
The delicacy of Lavinia, and the high honour of Eugenia, concurred in the 
propriety of this confession; and they all saw the urgent necessity of an 
immediate explanation with Sir Sedley, whose disappointment might every hour 
receive added weight from delay. Painful, therefore, confusing and distasteful, 
as was the task, Camilla determined upon the avowal, and as completely to be 
guided by Edgar in this difficult conjuncture, as if his advice were already 
sanctioned by conjugal authority.
