
Dilemmas

While the baronet was pondering, in the most melancholy manner, upon this 
sudden and unexpected demand of absence in Camilla, the grim goddess of Envy 
took possession of the fine features of Indiana; who declared she was immured 
alive, while her cousin went everywhere. The curiosity of Lynmere being 
excited, to inquire what was to be had or done at Southampton, he heard it 
abounded in good company, and good fish, and protested he must undoubtedly set 
out for it the next morning.

Indiana then wept with vexation and anger, and Miss Margland affirmed, she was 
the only young lady in Hampshire, who had never been at Southampton. Sir Hugh, 
concluding Edgar would attend Camilla, feared it might hurt the other match to 
part Eugenia from Clermont; and, after a little pause, though deeply sighing at 
such a dispersion from Cleves, consented that they should all go together. 
Camilla, therefore, was commissioned to ask leave of Mr. Tyrold for Eugenia, as 
well as for herself, and to add a petition from Sir Hugh, that he and Lavinia 
would spend the time of their absence at Cleves. The baronet then, of his own 
accord, asked Dr. Orkborne to be of the party, that Eugenia, he said, might run 
over her lessons with him in a morning, for fear of forgetting them.

A breach, however, such as this, of plans so long formed, and a desertion so 
voluntary of his house, at the very epoch he had settled for rendering its 
residence the most desirable, sent him in complete discomfiture to his bed. But 
there, in a few hours, his sanguine temper, and the kindness of his heart new 
modelled and new coloured the circumstances of his chagrin. He considered he 
should have full time to prepare for the double marriages; and that, with the 
aid of Lavinia, he might delight and amaze them all, with new dresses and new 
trinkets, which he could now choose without the torment of continual opposition 
from the documentising Miss Margland. Thus he restored his plastic mind to its 
usual satisfaction, and arose the next morning without a cloud upon his brow. 
The pure design of benevolence is to bestow happiness upon others, but its 
intrinsic reward is bringing happiness home!

But this sweetness of nature, so aptly supplying the first calls, and the first 
virtues of philosophy, was yet more severely again tried the next morning: for 
when, forgetting the caution he had solemnly promised, but vainly endeavoured 
to observe, he intimated to Lynmere these purposes, the youth, blushing at the 
idea of being taken for the destined husband of Eugenia in public, preferred 
all risks to being followed by such a rumour to Southampton; and, when he found 
she was to be of the party, positively declared the match to be out of all 
question.

Sir Hugh now stood aghast. Many had been his disappointments; his rage for 
forming schemes, and his credulity in persuading himself they would be 
successful, were sources not more fertile of amusement in their projection, 
than of mortification in their event: but here, the length of time since his 
plan had been arranged, joined to the very superficial view he had taken of any 
chance of its failure, had made him, by degrees, regard it as so fixed and 
settled, that it rather demanded congratulation than concurrence, rather waited 
to be enjoyed than executed.

Lynmere took not the smallest interest in the dismay of his uncle, but, turning 
upon his heel, said he would go to the stables, to see if he could find 
something that would carry him any better than the miserable jade he had 
mounted the preceding evening.

Sir Hugh remained in a kind of stupefaction. He seemed to himself to be bereft 
of every purpose of life; and robbed at once, of all view for his actions, all 
subject for his thoughts. The wide world, he believed, had never, hitherto, 
given birth to a plan so sagaciously conceived, so rationally combined, so 
infallibly secure: yet it was fallen, crushed, rejected!

A gleam of sunshine, however, ere long, [burst] upon his despondence; it 
occurred to him, that the learned education of Eugenia was still a secret to 
her cousin; his whole scheme, therefore, might perhaps yet be retrieved, when 
Lynmere should be informed of the peculiar preparations made for his conjugal 
happiness.

Fetching now a long breath, to aid the revival of his faculties and his 
spirits, he considered how to open his discourse so as to render it most 
impressive, and then sent for Clermont to attend him in his chamber.

'Nephew,' cried he, upon his entrance, 'I am now going to talk to you a little 
in your own way, having something to tell you of, that, I believe, you won't 
know how to hold cheap, being a thing that belongs to your studies; that is to 
say, to your cousin's; which, I hope, is pretty much the same thing, at least 
as to the end. Now the case of what I have to say is this; you must know, 
nephew, I had always set my heart upon having a rich heir; but it's what did 
not turn out, which I am sorry enough for; but where's the man that's so wise 
as to know his own doom? that is, the doom of his fortune. However, that's what 
I should not talk of to you, having so little; which, I hope, you won't take to 
heart. And, indeed, it in't much worth a wise man's thinking of, when he han't 
got it, for what's a fortune, at bottom, but mere metal? And so having, as I 
said before, no heir, I'm forced, in default of it, to take up with an heiress. 
But, to the end of making all parties happy, I've had her brought up in the 
style of a boy, for the sake of your marrying her. For which reason, I believe, 
in point of the classics....'

'Me, sir!' cried Lynmere, recovering from a long yawning fit, 'and what have I 
to do with marrying a girl like a boy? That's not my taste, my dear sir, I 
assure you. Besides, what has a wife to do with the classics? will they shew 
her how to order her table? I suppose when I want to eat, I may go to a cook's 
shop!'

Here subsided, at once, every particle of that reverence Sir Hugh had so long 
nourished for Clermont Lynmere. To hear the classics spoken of with disrespect, 
after all the pains he had taken, all the orders he had given for their 
exclusive study and veneration, and to find the common calls of life, which he 
had believed every scholar regarded but as means of existence, not auxiliaries 
of happiness, named with preference, distanced, at a stroke, all high opinion 
of his nephew, and made way, in its stead, for a displeasure not wholly free 
from disdain.

'Well, Clermont,' said he, after a pause, 'I won't keep you any longer, now I 
know your mind, which I wish I had known before, for the account of your 
cousin, who has had plague enough about it in her bringing up; which, however, 
I shall put an end to now, not seeing that any good has come from it.'

Lynmere joyfully accepted the permission to retire, enchanted that the 
rejection was thus completely off his mind, and had incurred only so slight a 
reproof, unaccompanied with one menace, or even remonstrance.

The first consternation of Sir Hugh, at the fall of this favourite project, 
was, indeed, somewhat lessened, at this moment, by the fall of his respectful 
opinion of its principal object. He sent therefore, hastily, for Eugenia, to 
whom he abruptly exclaimed, 'My dear girl, who'd have thought it? here's your 
cousin Clermont, with all his Greek and Latin, which I begin to bless God I 
don't know a word of, turning out a mere common nothing, thinking about his 
dinners and suppers! for which reason I beg you'll think of him no more, it not 
being worth your while; in particular, as he don't desire it.'

Eugenia, at this intimation, felt nearly as much relieved as disturbed. To be 
refused was, indeed, shocking; not to her pride, she was a stranger to that 
passion; but to her delicacy, which pointed out to her, in strong colours, the 
impropriety of having been exposed to such a decision: nevertheless, to find 
herself unshackled from an alliance to which she looked forward with dread, 
without offending her uncle, to whom so many reasons made it dear, or 
militating against her own heroic sentiments of generosity, which revolted 
against wilfully depriving her cousin of an inheritance already offered to him, 
removed a weight from her mind, which his every word, look, and gesture, had 
contributed to increase since their first meeting.

Dr. Marchmont had ridden to Beech Park, where he had spent the night, though 
uninvited by its agitated owner, whom the very name of Mrs. Berlinton, annexed 
to an accepted party of pleasure, had driven, in speechless agony, from Cleves.

'I wonder not,' cried he, 'at your disturbance; I feel for it, on the contrary, 
more than ever, from my observations of this evening; for I now see the charm, 
the potent charm, as well as the difficulties of your situation. This strange 
affair with Sir Sedley Clarendel cannot, in common foresight of what may ensue 
from it, be passed over without the most rigid scrutiny, and severest 
deliberation; yet, I sincerely hope, inquiry may produce some palliation: this 
young lady, I see, will not easily, for sweetness, for countenance, for every 
apparent attraction, be replaced: and, the first of all requisites is certainly 
in your favour; it is evident she loves you.'

'Loves me?' cried Edgar, his arms involuntarily encircling him as he repeated 
the magnetising words: 'Ah! Dr. Marchmont, could she then thus grieve and defy 
me?—And yet, so too said Jacob,—that good, faithful, excellent old 
servant....'

'Yes; I watched her unremittingly; and saw her so much hurt by your abrupt 
retreat, that her eyes filled with tears the moment you left the room.'

'O, Dr. Marchmont!—and for me were they shed?—my dear—dear friend! 
withhold from me such a picture—or reconcile me completely to viewing no 
other!'

'Once more, let me warn you to circumspection. The stake for which you are 
playing is life in its best part, 'tis peace of mind. That her manners are 
engaging, that her looks are captivating, and even that her heart is yours, 
admit no doubt: but the solidity or the lightness of that heart are yet to be 
proved.'

'Still, Doctor, though nearly in defiance of all my senses, still I can doubt 
anything rather than the heart of Camilla! Precipitate, I know, she has always 
been reckoned; but her precipitance is of kin to her noblest virtues; it 
springs but from the unsuspicious frankness of an unguarded, because innocent 
nature. And this, in a short time, her understanding will correct.'

'Are you sure it is adequate to the task? There is often, in early youth, a 
quickness of parts which raises expectations that are never realised. Their 
origin is but in the animal spirits, which, instead of ripening into judgment 
and sense by added years, dwindle into nothingness, or harden into flippancy. 
The character, at this period, is often so unstable, as to be completely new 
moulded by every new accident, or new associate. How innumerable are the 
lurking ill qualities that may lie dormant beneath the smiles of youth and 
beauty, in the season of their untried serenity! The contemporaries of half our 
fiercest viragos of fifty, may assure you that, at fifteen, they were all 
softness and sweetness. The present æra, however, my dear young friend, is 
highly favourable to all you can judiciously wish; namely, the entire 
re-establishment, or total destruction of all confidence.... To a man of your 
nice feelings, there is no medium. Your love demands respect, or your 
tranquillity exacts flight from its object. Set apart your offence at the 
cultivation of an acquaintance you disapprove; be yourself of the party to 
Southampton, and there, a very little observation will enable you to dive into 
the most secret recesses of her character.'

'Steadiness, Doctor, I do not want, nor yet, however I suffer from its 
exertion, fortitude: but a plan such as this, requires something more; it calls 
for an equivocal conduct, which, to me, would be impracticable, and to her, 
might prove delusive. No!... the openness I so much pine to meet with, I must, 
at least, not forfeit myself.'

'The fervour of your integrity, my dear Mandlebert, mistakes caution for 
deceit. If, indeed, this plan had any other view than your union, it would not 
merely be cruel, but infamous: the truth, however, is you must either pursue 
her upon proof, or abandon her at once, with every chance of repenting such a 
measure.'

'Alas! how torturing is hesitation! to believe myself the object of her regard 
... to think that first of all human felicities mine, yet to find it so pliant 
... so precarious ... to see her, with such thoughtless readiness, upon the 
point of falling into the hands of another!... receiving ... answering ... his 
letters!... letters too so confident, so daring! made up of insolent demands 
and imperious reproaches ... to meet him by his own appointment.... O, Dr. 
Marchmont! all delicious as is the idea of her preference ... all entwined as 
she is around my soul, how, now, how ever again, can I be happy, either to quit 
... or to claim her?...'

'This division of sentiment is what gives rise to my plan. At Southampton, you 
will see if Sir Sedley pursues her; and, as she will be uncertain of your 
intentions, you will be enabled to judge the singleness of her mind, and the 
stability of her affection, by the reception she gives him.'

'But if ... as I think I can gather from her delivering me his letters, the 
affair, whatever it has been, with Sir Sedley, is over.... What then?'

'You will have leisure to discuss it; and opportunity, also, to see her with 
other Sir Sedleys. Public places abound with those flutterers after youth and 
beauty; unmeaning admirers, who sigh at every new face; or black traitors to 
society, who seek but to try, and try but to publish their own power of 
conquest.'

'Will you, then, my dear Doctor, be also of the party? for my sake, will you, 
once more, quit your studies and repose, to give me, upon the spot, your 
counsel, according to the varying exigence of varying circumstances? to aid me 
to prepare and compose my mind for whatever may be the event, and to guide 
even, if possible, my wavering and distracted thoughts?'

To the importance of the period, and to a plea so serious, every obstacle 
yielded, and Dr. Marchmont agreed to accompany him to Southampton.
