
Live and Learn

Before the Cleves party assembled to breakfast, after the various arrangements 
made for Southampton, Mr. Dubster arrived, and demanded an interview with Sir 
Hugh, who, attending him to the drawing-room, asked his pleasure.

'Why, have not you read the young gentleman's letter, sir?' cried he, 
surprised, 'because, he said, he'd put it all down, clear as a pike staff, to 
save time.'

Sir Hugh had not heard of it.

'Why, then, if you please, sir, we'll go and ask that elderly gentlewoman, what 
she's done with it. She might as well have shewed it, after the young 
gentleman's taking the trouble to write it to her. But she is none of the good 
naturedest, I take it.'

Repairing, then, to Miss Margland, after his usual bows to all the company, 'I 
ask pardon, ma'am,' he cried; 'but pray, what's the reason of your keeping the 
young gentleman's letter to yourself, which was writ o'purpose to let the old 
gentleman know what I come for?'

'Because I never trouble myself with any thing that's impertinent,' she 
haughtily answered: though, in fact, when the family had retired, she had 
stolen downstairs, and read the letter; which contained a warm recommendation 
of Mr. Dubster to her favour, with abundant flippant offers to promote her own 
interest for so desirable a match, should Camilla prove blind to its 
advantages. This she had then burnt, with a determination never to acknowledge 
her condescension in opening it.

The repeated calls of Mr. Dubster procuring no further satisfaction; 'Why, 
then, I don't see,' he said, 'but what I'm as bad off, as if the young 
gentleman had not writ the letter, for I've got to speak for myself at last.'

Taking Sir Hugh, then, by a button of his coat, he desired he would go back 
with him to the other parlour: and there, with much circumlocution, and 
unqualified declarations of his having given over all thoughts of further 
marrying, till the young gentleman over persuaded him of his being particular 
agreeable to the young lady, he solemnly proposed himself for Miss Camilla 
Tyrold.

Sir Hugh, who perceived in this address nothing that was ridiculous, was 
somewhat drawn from reflecting on his own disappointment, by the pity he 
conceived for this hopeless suitor, to whom, with equal circumlocution of 
concern, he communicated, that his niece was on the point of marriage with a 
neighbour.

'I know that,' replied Mr. Dubster, nodding sagaciously, 'the young gentleman 
having told me of the young baronight; but he said, it was all against her 
will, being only your over teasing, and the like.'

'The Lord be good unto me!' exclaimed the baronet, holding up his hands; 'if I 
don't think all the young boys have a mind to drive me out of my wits, one 
after t'other!'

Hurrying, then, back to the breakfast parlour, and to Camilla, 'Come hither, my 
dear,' he cried, 'for here's a gentleman come to make his addresses to you, 
that won't take an answer.'

Every serious thought, and every melancholy apprehension in Camilla gave place, 
at this speech, to the ludicrous image of such an admirer as Mr. Dubster, 
foisted upon her by the ridiculous machinations of Lionel. She took Sir Hugh by 
the hand, and, drawing him away to the most distant window, said, in a low 
voice, 'My dear uncle, this is a mere trick of Lionel; the person you see here 
is, I believe, a tinker.'

'A tinker!' repeated Sir Hugh, quite loud, in defiance of the signs and hists! 
hists! of Camilla, 'good lack! that's a person I should never have thought of!' 
Then, walking up to Mr. Dubster, who was taking into his hands all the 
ornaments from the chimney-piece, one by one, to examine, 'Sir,' he said, 'you 
may be a very good sort of man, and I don't doubt but you are, for I've a 
proper respect for every trade in its way; but in point of marrying my niece, 
it's a thing I must beg you to put out of your head; it not being a proper 
subject to talk of to a young lady, from a person in that line.'

'Very well, sir,' answered Mr. Dubster, stiffly, and pouting, 'it's not of much 
consequence; don't make yourself uneasy. There's nothing in what I was going to 
propose but what was quite genteel. I'd scorn to address a lady else. She'd 
have a good five hundred a-year, in case of outliving me.'

'Good lack! five hundred a-year! who'd have thought of such a thing by the 
tinkering business?'

'The what business, did you say, sir?' cried Mr. Dubster, strutting up to the 
baronet, with a solemn frown.

'The tinkering business, my good friend. An't you a tinker?'

'Sir!' cried Mr. Dubster, swelling, 'I did not think, when I was coming to make 
such a handsome offer, of being affronted at such a rate as this. Not that I 
mind it. It's not worth fretting about. However, as to a tinker, I'm no more a 
tinker than yourself, whatever put it in your head.'

'Good lack, my dear,' cried the baronet, to Camilla, 'the gentleman quite 
denies it.'

Camilla, though unable to refrain from laughing, confessed she had received the 
information from Mrs. Arlbery at the Northwick breakfast, who, she now 
supposed, had said it in random sport.

Sir Hugh cordially begged his pardon, and asked him to take a seat at the 
breakfast table, to soften the undesigned offence.

A note now arrived from Mr. Tyrold to the baronet. It contained his consent to 
return, with Lavinia, to Cleves, and his ready acquiescence in the little 
excursion to Southampton, since Miss Margland would be superintendant of the 
party; 'and since,' he added, 'they will have another guardian, to whom already 
I consign my Camilla, and, upon her account, my dear Eugenia also, with the 
same fearless confidence I should feel in seeing them again under the maternal 
wing.'

Sir Hugh, who always read his letters aloud, said, when he had done: 'See what 
it is to be a good boy! my brother looks upon young Mr. Edgar as these young 
girls' husband already; that is, of one of them; by which means the other 
becomes his sister; which, I'm sure, is a trouble he won't mind, except as a 
pleasure.'

Camilla's distress at this speech past unnoticed, from the abrupt entrance of 
Lynmere, giving orders aloud to his servant to get ready for Southampton.

Inflamed with triumph in his recent success in baffling his uncle, that youth 
was in the most turbulent spirits, and fixed a resolution either to lord it 
over the whole house, or regain at once his liberty for returning to the 
Continent.

Forcing a chair between Sir Hugh and Camilla, he seized rapidly whatever looked 
most inviting from every plate on the table, to place upon his own, murmuring 
the whole time against the horses, declaring the stud the most wretched he had 
ever seen, and protesting the old groom must be turned away without loss of 
time.

'What, Jacob?' cried the baronet; 'why, nephew, he has lived with me from a 
boy; and now he's grown old, I'd sooner rub down every horse with my own hand, 
than part with him.'

'He must certainly go, sir. There's no keeping him. I may be tempted else to 
knock his brains out some day. Besides, I have a very good fellow I can 
recommend to you of my own.'

'Clermont, I've no doubt of his being a good fellow, which I'm very glad of; 
but as to your always knocking out the brains of my servants, it's a thing I 
must beg you not to talk of any more, being against the law. Besides which, it 
don't sound very kind of you, considering their having done you no harm; never 
having seen your face, as one may say, except just to wait upon you; which can 
hardly be reckoned a bad office; besides a servant's being a man, as well as 
you; whether Homer and Horace tell you so or no.'

To see Sir Hugh displeased, was a sight new to the whole house. Camilla and 
Eugenia, mutually pained for him, endeavoured, by various little kind offices, 
to divert his attention; but Indiana thought his displeasure proved her brother 
to be a wit; and Clermont rose in spirits and in insolence upon the same idea: 
too shallow to know, that of all the qualities with which the perversity of 
human nature is gifted, and power which is the most common to attain, and the 
most easy to practise, is the art of provoking.

Jacob now appearing, Lynmere ordered some shrimps.

There were none.

'No shrimps? There's nothing to be had! 'Tis a wretched county this!'

'You'll get nice shrimps at Southampton, sir, by what I can hear,' said Mr. 
Dubster. 'Tom Hicks says he has been sick with 'em many a day, he's eat such a 
heap. They gets 'em by hundreds, and hundreds, and hundreds at a time.'

'Pray, nephew, how long shall you stay? because of my nieces coming back at the 
same time.'

'A fortnight's enough to tire me anywhere, sir. Pray what do you all do with 
yourselves here after breakfast? What's your mode?'

'Mode, nephew? we've got no particular mode that ever I heard of. However, 
among so many of us, I think it's a little hard, if you can find nothing to say 
to us; all, in a manner, your relations too.'

'We take no notice of relations now, sir; that's out.'

'I'm sorry for it, nephew, for a relation's a relation, whether you take notice 
of him or not. And there's ne'er an ode in Virgil will tell you to the 
contrary, as I believe.'

A short silence now ensued, which was broken by a sigh from Sir Hugh, who 
ejaculated to himself, though aloud, 'I can't but think what my poor friend 
Westwyn will do, if his son's come home in this manner! caring for nobody, but 
an oyster, or a shrimp; ... unless it's a newspaper!'

'And what should a man care for else, my good old friend, in a desart place 
such as this?'

'Good old friend!' repeated the baronet; 'to be sure, I'm not very young.... 
However, as to that ... but you mean no harm, I know, for which reason I can't 
be so ill-natured as to take it ill. However, if poor Westwyn is served in this 
... way.... He's my dearest friend that I've got, out of us all here, of my own 
kin, and he's got only one son, and he sent him to foreign parts only for 
cheapness; and if he should happen to like nothing he can get at home, it won't 
answer much in saving, to send out for things all day long.'

'O don't be troubled, sir; Westwyn's but a poor creature. He'll take up with 
anything. He lived within his allowance the whole time. A mighty poor creature.'

'I'm glad of it! glad of it, indeed!' cried Sir Hugh, with involuntary 
eagerness; 'I should have been sorry if my poor good old friend had had such 
disappointment.'

'Upon my honour,' cried Lynmere, piqued, 'the quoz of the present season are 
beyond what a man could have hoped to see!'

'Quoz! what's quoz, nephew?'

'Why, it's a thing there's no explaining to you sort of gentlemen; and 
sometimes we say quiz, my good old sir.'

Sir Hugh, now, for almost the first time in his life, felt seriously affronted. 
His utmost lenity could not palliate the wilful disrespect of his language; 
and, with a look of grave displeasure, he answered, 'Really, nephew, I can't 
but say, I think you've got rather a particular odd way of speaking to persons. 
As to talking so much about people's being old, you'd do well to consider 
that's no fault in anybody; except one's years, which is what we can't be said 
to help.'

'You descant too much upon words, sir; we have left off, now, using them with 
such prodigious precision. It's quite over, sir.'

'O, my dear Clermont!' cried Sir Hugh, losing his short movement of anger in a 
more tender sensation of concern, 'how it goes to my heart to see you turn out 
such a jackanapes!'

Lynmere, resentfully hanging back, said no more: and Mr. Dubster, having drunk 
seven dishes of tea, with a long apology between each for the trouble, gladly 
seized the moment of pause, to ask Camilla when she had heard from their friend 
Mrs. Mittin, adding, 'I should have brought you a letter from her, ma'am, 
myself, but that I was rather out of sorts with her; for happening to meet her, 
the day as you went, walking on them Pantiles, with some of her quality 
binding, when I was not dressed out quite in my best becomes, she made as if 
she did not know me. Not as it signifies. It's pretty much of a muchness to me. 
I remember her another sort of person to what she looks now, before I was a 
gentleman myself.'

'Why, pray, what was you then, sir?' cried Sir Hugh, with great simplicity.

'As to that, sir, there's no need to say whether I was one thing or another, as 
I know of; I'm not in the least ashamed of what I was.'

Sir Hugh seeing him offended, was beginning an apology; but, interrupting him, 
'No, sir,' he said, 'there's no need to say nothing about it. It's not a thing 
to take much to heart. I've been defamed often enough, I hope, to be above 
minding it. Only just this one thing, sir; I beg I may have the favour to be 
introduced to that lady as had the obligingness to call me a tinker, when I 
never was no such thing.'

Breakfast now being done, the ladies retired to prepare for their journey.

'Well,' cried Mr. Dubster, looking after Eugenia, 'that little lady will make 
no great figure at such a place as Southton. I would not have her look out for 
a husband there.'

'She'd have been just the thing for me!' cried Lynmere, haughtily rising, and 
conceitedly parading his fine form up and down the room; his eyes catching it 
from looking-glass to looking-glass, by every possible contrivance; 'just the 
thing! matched to perfection!'

'Lord help me! if I don't find myself in the dark about every thing!' cried Sir 
Hugh; 'who'd have thought of you scholars thinking so much of beauty; I should 
be glad to know what your classics say to that point?'

'Faith, my good sir, I never trouble myself to ask. From the time we begin our 
tours, we wipe away all that stuff as fast as possible from our thoughts.'

'Why, pray, nephew, what harm could it do to your tours?'

'We want room, sir, room in the pericranium! As soon as we begin to travel, we 
give up everything to taste. And then we want clear heads. Clear heads, sir, 
for pictures, statues, busts, alto relievos, basso relievos, tablets, 
monuments, mausoleums....'

'If you go on at that rate, nephew,' interrupted Sir Hugh, holding his ears, 
'you'll put my poor head quite into a whirligig. And it's none of the deepest 
already, Lord help me!'

Lynmere now, without ceremony, made off; and Mr. Dubster, left alone with the 
baronet, said they might as well proceed to business. 'So pray, sir, if I may 
make bold, in the case we come to a right understanding about the young lady, 
what do you propose to give her down?'

Sir Hugh, staring, inquired what he meant.

'Why, I mean, sir, what shall you give her at the first? I know she's to have 
it all at your demise; but that i'n't the bird in the hand. Now, when once I 
know that, I can make my offers, which shall be handsome or not, according. And 
that's but fair. So how much can you part with, sir?'

'Not a guinea!' cried Sir Hugh, with some emotion; 'I can't give her anything! 
Mr. Edgar knows that.'

'That's hard, indeed, sir. What nothing for a setting out? And, pray, sir, what 
may the sum total be upon your demise?'

'Not a penny!' cried Sir Hugh, with still more agitation: 'Don't you know I've 
disinherited her?'

'Disinherited her? why this is bad news enough! And pray, sir, what for?'

'Nothing! She never offended me in thought, word, nor deed!'

'Well, that's odd enough. And when did you do it, sir?'

'The very week she was nine years old, poor thing! which I shall never forget 
as long as I live, being my worst action.'

'Well, this is particular enough! And young squire Tyrold's never heard a word 
of it: which is somewhat of a wonder too.'

'Not heard of it? why the whole family know it! I've settled everything I was 
worth in the world upon her younger sister, that you saw sitting by her.'

'Well, if Tom Hicks did not as good as tell me so ever so long ago, though the 
young squire said it was all to the contrary: what for, I don't know; unless to 
take me in. But he won't find that quite so easy, asking his pardon. 
Matrimony's a good thing enough, when it's to help a man forward: but a person 
must be a fool indeed, to put himself out of his way for nothing.'

He then formally wished the baronet a good day, and hastened from the house, 
puffed up with vain glory, at his own sagacious precautions, which had thus 
happily saved him from being tricked into unprofitable wedlock.

Mrs. Berlinton now arrived, and, as Camilla was ready, though trembling, 
doubtful, apprehensive of the step she was taking, declined alighting. A 
general meeting was to take place at the inn: and the baronet, putting a twenty 
pound note into her hand, with the most tender blessings parted with his 
darling niece. And then, surprised at not seeing Edgar to breakfast, sent his 
butler to tell him the history of the excursion.

Lynmere was already set off on horseback: and the party, consisting of Dr. 
Orkborne, Miss Margland, Indiana, and Eugenia, followed two hours after, in the 
coach of the baronet, which drove from the park as the chaise entered it with 
Mr. Tyrold and Lavinia, to supply their places.

BOOK VIII
