
The Power of Prepossession

The two sisters were silent from the hotel to the house of Mrs. Berlinton.... 
From the height of happiest expectation, raised by the quick return of Edgar, 
Camilla was sunk into the lowest despondence, by the abortive conclusion of the 
meeting: while Eugenia was absorbed in mute joy, and wrapt expectation. But 
Mrs. Mittin, undisturbed by the pangs of uncertainty, and unoccupied by any 
romantic persuasion of bliss, spoke amply, with respect to quantity, for all 
three.

Mrs. Berlinton, though somewhat struck at first sight of Eugenia, with her 
strange contrast to Camilla, received her with all the distinguishing kindness 
due to the sister of her friend.

She had the poems of Collins in her hand; and, at their joint desire, instead 
of putting the book aside, read aloud, and with tenderest accent, one of his 
most plaintive odes.

Eugenia was enraptured. Ah! thought she, this is indeed the true sister of the 
accomplished Melmond!... She shall share with him my adoration. My heart shall 
be devoted ... after my own dear family ... to the homage of their perfections!

The ode, to her great delight, lasted till the dinner was announced, when 
Melmond appeared: but her prepossession could alone give any charm to his 
sight: he could barely recollect that he had seen her, or even Camilla before; 
he had conversed with neither; his eyes had been devoted to Indiana, and the 
despondence which had become his portion since the news of the marriage of his 
aunt, seemed but rendered the more peculiarly bitter, by this intimate 
connection with the family of an object so adored.

Yet, though nothing could be more spiritless than the hour of dinner, Eugenia 
discovered in it no deficiency; she had previously settled, that the presence 
of Melmond could only breathe sweets and perfection, and the magic of prejudice 
works every event into its own circle of expectation.

Melmond did not even accompany them back to the drawing-room. Eugenia sighed; 
but nobody heard her. Mrs. Mittin said, she had something of great consequence 
to do in her own room, and Mrs. Berlinton, to divert the languor she found 
creeping upon them all, had recourse to Hammond's elegies.

These were still reading, when a servant brought in the name of Lord Valhurst. 
'O, deny me to him! deny me to him!' cried Mrs. Berlinton; ''tis a relation of 
Mr. Berlinton's, and I hate him.'

The order was given, however, too late; he entered the room.

The name, as Camilla knew it not, she had heard unmoved; but the sight of a 
person who had so largely contributed to shock and terrify her in the 
bathing-house, struck her with horror. Brought up with the respect of other 
times, she had risen at his entrance; but she turned suddenly round upon 
recollecting him, and instead of the courtsie she intended making, 
involuntarily moved away her chair from the part of the room to which he was 
advancing.

This was unnoticed by Mrs. Berlinton, whose chagrin at his intrusion made her 
wish to walk away also; while with Lord Valhurst it only passed, joined to her 
rising, for a mark of her being but little accustomed to company. That Eugenia 
rose too was not perceived, as she rather lost than gained in height by 
standing.

Most obsequiously, but most unsuccessfully, the peer made his court to Mrs. 
Berlinton; inquiring after her health, with fulsome tenderness, and extolling 
her good looks with nearly gross admiration. Mrs. Berlinton listened, for she 
was incapable of incivility; though, weary and disgusted, she seldom made the 
smallest answer.

The two sisters might, with ease, equally have escaped notice, since, though 
Mrs. Berlinton occasionally addressed them the peer never turned from herself, 
had not Mrs. Mittin, abruptly entering in search of a pair of scissors, 
perceived him, and hastily called out, 'O lauk, sir, if it is not you! I know 
you again well enough! But I hope, now you see us in such good company as this 
good lady's, you'll believe me another time, when I tell you we're not the sort 
of persons you took us for! Miss Tyrold, my dear, I hope you've spoke to the 
gentleman?'

Lord Valhurst with difficulty recollected Mrs. Mittin, from the very cursory 
view his otherwise occupied eyes had taken of her; but when the concluding 
words made him look at Camilla, whose youth and beauty were not so liable to be 
forgotten, he knew at once her associate, and was aware of the meaning of her 
harangue.

Sorry to appear before his fair kinswoman to any disadvantage, though by no 
means displeased at an opportunity of again seeing a young creature he had 
thought so charming, he began an apology to Mrs. Mittin, while his eyes were 
fixed upon Camilla, vindicating himself from every intention that was not 
respectful, and hoping she did not so much injure as to mistake him.

Mrs. Mittin was just beginning to answer that she knew better, when the words, 
'Why, my Lord, how have you offended Mrs. Mittin?' dropping from Mrs. 
Berlinton, instantly new strung all her notions. To find him a nobleman was to 
find him innocent; for, though she did not quite suppose that a peer was not a 
mortal, she had never spoken to one before; and the power of title upon the 
ear, like that of beauty upon the eye, is, in its first novelty, 
all-commanding; manifold as are the drawbacks to the influence of either, when 
awe is lost by familiarity, and habitual reflection takes place of casual and 
momentary admiration. Title then, as well as beauty, demands mental 
auxiliaries; and those who possess either, more watched than the common race, 
seem of higher responsibility; but proportioned to the censure they draw where 
they err, is the veneration they inspire where their eminence is complete. Nor 
is this the tribute of prejudice, as those who look up to all superiority with 
envy love to aver; the impartial and candid reflectors upon human frailty, who, 
in viewing it, see with its elevation its surrounding temptations, will call it 
but the tribute of justice.

To Mrs. Mittin, however, the mere sound of a title was enough; she felt its 
ascendance without examining its claims, and, dropping the lowest courtsie her 
knees could support, confusedly said, she hoped his lordship would excuse her 
speaking so quick and improperly, which she only did from not knowing who he 
was; for, if she had known him better, she should have been sure he was too 
much the gentleman to do anything with an ill design.

His lordship courteously accepted the apology; and advanced to Camilla, to 
express his hopes she had not participated in such injurious suspicions.

She made no answer, and Mrs. Berlinton inquired what all this meant.

'I protest, my dear madam,' said the peer, 'I do not well comprehend myself. I 
only see there has been some misunderstanding; but I hope this young lady will 
believe me, when I declare, upon my honour, that I had no view but to offer my 
protection, at the time I saw her under alarm.'

This was a declaration Camilla could not dispute, and even felt inclined to 
credit, from the solemnity with which it was uttered; but to discuss it was 
every way impossible, and therefore, coldly bowing her head, she seemed 
acquiescent.

Lord Valhurst now pretty equally divided his attention between these two 
beautiful young women; looking at and complimenting them alternately, till a 
servant came in and said, 'The two Mr. Westwyns desire to see Miss Tyrold.'

Camilla did not wish to avoid persons to whom she was so much obliged, but 
begged she might receive them in the next apartment, that Mrs. Berlinton might 
not be disturbed.

The eager old gentleman stood with the door in one hand, and his son in the 
other, awaiting her. 'My dear young lady,' he cried, 'I have been hunting you 
out for hours. Your good governess had not a mind to give me your direction, 
thinking me, I suppose, but a troublesome old fellow; and I did not know which 
way to turn, till Hal found it out. Hal's pretty quick. So now, my dear young 
lady, let me tell you my errand; which I won't be tedious in, for fear, another 
time, you may rather not see me. And the more I see you, the less I like to 
think such a thing. However, with all my good will to make haste, I must 
premise one thing, as it is but fair. Hal was quite against my coming upon this 
business. But I don't think it the less right for that; and so I come. I never 
yet saw any good of a man's being ruled by his children. It only serves to make 
them think their old fathers superannuated. And if once I find Hal taking such 
a thing as that into his head, I'll cut him off with a shilling, well as I love 
him.'

'Your menace, sir,' said Henry, colouring, though smiling, 'gives me no alarm, 
for I see no danger. But ... shall we not detain Miss Tyrold too long from her 
friends?'

'Ay now, there comes in what I take notice to be the taste of the present day! 
a lad can hardly enter his teens, before he thinks himself wiser than his 
father, and gives him his counsel, and tells him what he thinks best. And, if a 
man i'n't upon his guard, he may be run down for an old dotard, before he knows 
where he is, and see his son setting up for a member of parliament, making laws 
for him. Now this is what I don't like; so I keep a tight hand upon Hal, that 
he mayn't do it. For Hal's but a boy, ma'am, though he's so clever. Not that I 
pretend I'd change him neither, for e'er an old fellow in the three kingdoms. 
Well, but, now I'll tell you what I come for. You know how angry I was about 
Hal's turning that man out of the room? well, I took all the pains I could to 
come at the bottom of the fray, intending, all the time, to make Hal ask the 
man's pardon; and now what do you think is the end? Why, I've found out Hal to 
be in the right! The man proves to be a worthless fellow, that has defamed the 
niece of my dear Sir Hugh Tyrold; and if Hal had lashed him with a 
cat-o'nine-tails, I should have been glad of it. I can't say I should have 
found fault. So you see, my dear young lady, I was but a cross old fellow, to 
be so out of sorts with poor Hal.'

Camilla, with mingled gratitude and shame, offered her acknowledgments; though 
what she heard astonished, if possible, even more than it mortified her. How in 
the world, thought she, can I have provoked this slander?

She knew not how little provocation is necessary for calumny; nor how regularly 
the common herd, where appearances admit two interpretations, decide for the 
worst. Girt designed her neither evil nor good; but not knowing who nor what 
she was, simply filled up the doubts in his own mind, by the bias of his own 
character.

Confused as much as herself, Henry proposed immediately to retire; and, as 
Camilla did not invite them to stay, Mr. Westwyn could not refuse his consent: 
though, sending his son out first, he stopt to say, in a low voice, 'What do 
you think of Hal, my dear young lady? I'n't he a brave rogue? And did not you 
tell me I might be proud of my son? And so I am, I promise you! How do you 
think my old friend will like Hal? I shall take him to Cleves. He's another 
sort of lad to Master Clermont! I hope, my dear young lady, you don't like your 
cousin? He's but a sad spark, I give you my word. Not a bit like Hal.'

When the carriage came for Eugenia, who was self-persuaded this day was the 
most felicitous of her life, she went so reluctantly, that Mrs. Berlinton, 
caught by her delight in the visit, though unsuspicious of its motive, invited 
her to renew it the next morning.

At night, Mrs. Mittin, following Camilla to her chamber, said, 'See here, my 
dear! what do you say to this? Did you ever see a prettier cloak? look at the 
cut of it, look at the capes! look at the mode! And as for the lace, I don't 
think all Southampton can produce its fellow; what do you say to it, my dear?'

'What every body must say to it, Mrs. Mittin; that it's remarkably pretty.'

'Well, now try it on. There's a set! there's a fall off the shoulders! do but 
look at it in the glass. I'd really give something you could but see how it 
becomes you. Now, do pray, only tell me what you think of it?'

'Always the same, Mrs. Mittin; that it's extremely pretty.'

'Well, my dear, then, now comes out the secret! It's your own! you may well 
stare; but it's true; it's your own, my dear!'

She demanded an explanation; and Mrs. Mittin said, that, having taken notice 
that her cloak looked very mean by the side of Mrs. Berlinton's, when she 
compared them together, she resolved upon surprising her with a new one as 
quick as possible. She had, therefore, got the pattern of Mrs. Berlinton's and 
cut it out, and then got the mode at an haberdasher's, and then the lace at a 
milliner's, and then set to work so hard, that she had got it done already.

Camilla, seeing the materials were all infinitely richer than any she had been 
accustomed to wear, was extremely chagrined by such officiousness, and gravely 
inquired how much this would add to her debts.

'I don't know yet, my dear; but I had all the things as cheap as possible; but 
as it was not all at one shop, I can't be clear as to the exact sum.'

Camilla, who had determined to avoid even the shadow of a debt, and to forbear 
every possible expence till she had not one remaining, was now not merely 
vexed, but angry. Mrs. Mittin, however, upon whose feelings that most 
troublesome of all qualities to its possessors, delicacy, never obtruded, went 
on, extolling her own performance, and praising her own good nature, without 
discovering that either were impertinent; and, so far from conceiving it 
possible they could be unwelcome, that she attributed the concern of Camilla to 
modesty, on account of her trouble; and mistook her displeasure for distress, 
what she could do for her in return. And, indeed, when she finished her double 
panegyric upon the cloak and its maker, with confessing she had sat up the 
whole night, in order to get it done, Camilla considered herself as too much 
obliged to her intention to reproach any further its want of judgment; and 
concluded by merely entreating she would change her note, pay for it 
immediately, discharge her other accounts with all speed, and make no future 
purchase for her whatsoever.
