
A Scuffle

Eugenia failed not to observe her appointment the next morning, which was 
devoted to elegiac poetry. A taste so similar operated imperceptibly upon Mrs. 
Berlinton, who detained her till she was compelled to return to prepare for a 
great ball at the public rooms; the profound deliberations of Miss Margland, 
how to exhibit her fair pupil, having finished, like most deliberations upon 
such subjects, by doing that which is done by every body else upon the same 
occasion.

Sir Hugh had given directions to Miss Margland to clear his three nieces 
equally of all expenses relative to public places. Camilla, therefore, being 
entitled to a ticket, and having brought with her whatever was unspoilt of her 
Tunbridge apparel, thought this the most seasonable opportunity she could take 
for again seeing Edgar, who, in their present delicate situation, would no 
longer, probably, think it right to inquire for her at a stranger's.

Mrs. Berlinton had not purposed appearing in public, till she had formed her 
own party; but an irrepressible curiosity to see Indiana induced her to 
accompany Camilla, with no other attendant than Lord Valhurst.

Mrs. Mittin sought vainly to be of the party; Mrs. Berlinton, though permitting 
her stay in her house, and treating her with constant civility, had no idea of 
including her in her own society, which she aimed to have always distinguished 
by either rank, talents, or admirers: and Camilla, who now felt her integrity 
involved in her economy, was firm against every hint for assisting her with a 
ticket.

Lord Valhurst, who alone, of the fashionable sojourners, had yet discovered the 
arrival of Mrs. Berlinton, was highly gratified by this opportunity of 
attending two such fair creatures in public.

Mrs. Berlinton, as usual, was the last to enter the room; for she never began 
the duties of the toilette till after tea-time. Two such youthful beauties were 
not likely to pass without observation.

Mrs. Berlinton, already no longer new to it, had alternately the air of 
receiving it with the most winning modesty, or of not noticing she received it 
at all: for though, but a few months since, she had scarcely been even seen by 
twenty persons, and even of those had never met a fixed eye without a blush, 
the feelings are so often the mere concomitants of the habits, that she could 
now already know herself the principal object of a whole assembly, without any 
sensation of timidity, or appearance of confusion. To be bold was not in her 
nature, which was soft and amiable; but admiration is a dangerous assaulter of 
diffidence, and familiarity makes almost any distinction met unmoved.

Camilla was too completely engrossed by her heart, to think of her appearance.

Lord Valhurst, from his time of life, seemed to be their father, though his 
adulating air as little suited that character as his inclination. He scarce 
knew upon which most to lavish his compliments, or to regale his eyes, and 
turned, half expiring with ecstasy, from the soft charms of his kinswoman, with 
something, he thought, resembling animation, to the more quickening influence 
of her bright-eyed companion.

But the effect produced upon the company at large by the radiant beauty of 
Indiana, who had entered some time, was still more striking than any immediate 
powers from all the bewitching graces of Mrs. Berlinton, and all the 
intelligent loveliness of Camilla. Her faultless face, her perfect form, raised 
wonder in one sex, and overpowered envy in the other. The men looked at her, as 
at something almost too celestial for their devoirs; the women, even the most 
charming amongst them, saw themselves distanced from all pretensions to 
rivalry. She was followed, but not approached; gazed at, as if a statue, and 
inquired after, rather as a prodigy than a mortal.

This awful homage spread not, however, to her party; the watchful but 
disdainful eyes of Miss Margland obtained for herself, even with usury, all the 
haughty contempt they bestowed upon others: Eugenia was pronounced to be a 
foil, brought merely in ridicule: and Dr. Orkborne, whom Miss Margland, though 
detesting, forced into the set, in preference to being without a man, to hand 
them from the carriage, and to call it for them at night, had a look so forlorn 
and distressed, while obliged to parade with them up and down the room, that he 
seemed rather a prisoner than an esquire, and more to require a guardian to 
prevent his escaping himself, than to serve for one in securing his young 
charges from any attack.

Miss Margland augured nothing short of half a score proposals of marriage the 
next day, from the evident brilliancy of this first opening into life of her 
beautiful pupil; whose own eyes, while they dazzled all others, sought eagerly 
those of Melmond, which they meant to vanquish, if not annihilate.

The first care of Miss Margland was to make herself and her young ladies known 
to the master of the ceremonies. Indiana needed not that precaution to be 
immediately the choice of the most elegant man in the room; yet she was piqued, 
not delighted, and Miss Margland felt still more irritated, that he proved to 
be only a baronet, though a nobleman, at the same time, had presented himself 
to Eugenia. It is true the peer was ruined; but his title was unimpaired; and 
though the fortune of the baronet, like his person, was in its prime, Indiana 
thought herself degraded by his hand, since the partner of her cousin was of 
superior rank.

Eugenia, insensible to this honour, looked only for Melmond; not like Indiana, 
splendidly to see and kill, but silently to view and venerate. Melmond, 
however, was not there; he knew his little command over his passion, in 
presence of its object; he knew, too, that the expence of public places was not 
beyond the propriety of his income, and virtuously devoted his evening to his 
sick aunt.

Edgar had waited impatiently the entrance of Camilla. His momentary sight of 
Lord Valhurst, at the bathing-room, did not bring him to his remembrance in his 
present more shewy apparel, and he was gratified to see only an old beau in her 
immediate suite. He did not deem it proper, as they were now circumstanced, to 
ask her to dance; but he quietly approached and bowed to her, and addressed 
some civil inquiries to Mrs. Berlinton. The Westwyns had waited for her at the 
door; and the father had immediately made her give her hand to Henry to join 
the dancers.

'That's a charming girl,' cried old Mr. Westwyn, when she was gone; 'a very 
charming girl, I promise you. I have taken a prodigious liking to her; and so 
has Hal.'

Revived by this open speech, which made him hope there was no serious design, 
Edgar smiled upon the old gentleman, who had addressed it to the whole 
remaining party; and said, 'You have not known that young lady long, I believe, 
sir?'

'No, sir; but a little while; but that I don't mind. A long while and a short 
while is all one, when I like a person: for I don't think how many years 
they've got over their heads since first I saw them, but how many good things 
they've got on the inside their hearts to make me want to see them again. Her 
uncle's the dearest friend I have in the world; and when I go from this place, 
I shall make him a visit; for I'm sure of a welcome. But he has never seen my 
Hal. However, that good girl will be sure to speak a kind word for him, I know; 
for she thinks very well of him; she told me herself, I might be proud of my 
son. I can't say but I've loved the girl ever since for it.'

Edgar was so much pleased with the perfectly natural character of this old 
gentleman, that, though alarmed at his intended call upon the favour of Sir 
Hugh, through the influence of Camilla, for Henry, he would yet have remained 
in his society, had he not been driven from it by the junction of young 
Lynmere, whose shallow insolence he thought insupportable.

Mrs. Berlinton, who declined dancing, had arrived so late, that when Henry led 
back Camilla, the company was summoned to the tea-table. She was languishing 
for an introduction to Indiana, the absence of Melmond obviating all present 
objection to their meeting; she therefore gave Camilla the welcome task to 
propose that the two parties should unite.

Many years had elapsed since Miss Margland had received so sensible a 
gratification; and, in the coalition which took place, she displayed more of 
civility in a few minutes, than she had exerted during the whole period of her 
Yorkshire and Cleves residence.

Notwithstanding all she had heard of her charms, Mrs. Berlinton still saw with 
surprise and admiration the exquisite face and form of the chosen of her 
brother, whom she now so sincerely bewailed, that, had her own wealth been 
personal or transferrable, she would not have hesitated in sharing it with him, 
to aid his better success.

Lord Valhurst adhered tenaciously to his kinswoman; and the three gentlemen who 
had danced the last dances with Indiana, Eugenia, and Camilla, asserted the 
privilege of attending their partners at the tea-table.

In a few minutes, Lynmere, coming up to them, with 'Well, have you got any 
thing here one can touch?' leant his hand on the edge, and his whole body over 
the table, to take a view at his ease of its contents.

'Suppose there were nothing, sir?' said old Westwyn; 'look round, and see what 
you could want.'

'Really, sir,' said Miss Margland, between whom and Camilla Lynmere had 
squeezed himself a place, 'you don't use much ceremony!'

Having taken some tea, he found it intolerable, and said he must have a glass 
of Champagne.

'La, brother!' cried Indiana, 'if you bring any wine, I can't bear to stay.'

Miss Margland said the same; but he whistled, and looked round him without 
answering.

Mrs. Berlinton, who, though she had thought his uncommonly fine person an 
excuse for his intrusion, thought nothing could excuse this ill-breeding, 
proposed they should leave the tea-table, and walk.

'Sit still, ladies,' said Mr. Westwyn, 'and drink your tea in peace.' Then, 
turning to Lynmere, 'I wonder,' he cried, 'you a'n't ashamed of yourself! If 
you were a son of mine, I'll tell you what; I'd lock you up! I'd serve you as I 
did when I carried you over to Leipsic, eight years ago. I always hated pert 
boys. I can't fancy 'em.'

Lynmere, affecting not to hear him, though inwardly firing, called violently 
after a waiter; and, in mere futile vengeance, not only gave an order for 
Champagne, but demanded some Stilton cheese.

'Cheese!' exclaimed Miss Margland, 'if you order any cheese, I can't so much as 
stay in the room. Think what a nauseous smell it will make!'

The man answered, they had no Stilton cheese in the house, but the very best of 
every other sort.

Lynmere, who had only given this command to shew his defiance of control, 
seized, with equal avidity, the opportunity to abuse the waiter; affirming he 
belonged to the worst served hotel in Christendom.

The man walked off in dudgeon, and Mr. Westwyn, losing his anger in his 
astonishment at this effrontery, said, 'And pray, Mr. Lynmere, what do you 
pretend to know of Stilton cheese? do they make it at Leipsic? did you ever so 
much as taste it in your life?'

'O, yes! excellent! excellentissimo! I can eat no other.'

'Eat no other! it's well my Hal don't say the same! I'd churn him to a cheese 
himself if he did! And pray, Mr. Lynmere, be so good as to let me know how you 
got it there?'

'Ways and means, sir; ways and means!'

'Why you did not send across the sea for it?'

'A travelled man, sir, thinks no more of what you call across the sea, than 
you, that live always over your own fire-side, think of stepping across a 
kennel.'

'Well, sir, well,' said the old gentleman, now very much piqued, 'I can't but 
say I feel some concern for my old friend, to have his money doused about at 
such a rantipole rate. A boy to be sending over out of Germany into England for 
Stilton cheese! I wish it had been Hal with all my heart! I promise you I'd 
have given him enough of it. If the least little thought of the kind was but 
once to have got in his head, I'd have taken my best oaken stick, and have done 
him the good office to have helped it out for him: and have made him thank me 
after too! I hate daintiness; especially in boys. I have no great patience with 
it.'

Only more incensed, Lynmere called aloud for his Champagne. The waiter civilly 
told him, it was not usual to bring wine during tea: but he persisted; and Mr. 
Westwyn, who saw the ladies all rising, authoritatively, told the waiter to 
mind no such directions. Lynmere, who had entered the ball-room in his 
riding-dress, raised a switch at the man, which he durst not raise at Mr. 
Westwyn, and protested, in a threatening attitude, he would lay it across his 
shoulders, if he obeyed not. The man, justly provoked, thought himself 
authorised to snatch if from him: Clermont resisted; a fierce scuffle ensued; 
and though Henry, by immediate intervention, could have parted them, Mr. 
Westwyn insisted there should be no interference, saying, 'If any body's 
helped, let it be the waiter; for he's here to do his duty: he don't come only 
to behave unmannerly, for his own pleasure. And if I see him hard run, it's 
odds but I lend him my own fist to right him.—I like fair play.'

The female party, in very serious alarm at this unpleasant scene, rose to hurry 
away. Lord Valhurst was ambitious to suffice as guardian to both his fair 
charges; but Henry, when prohibited from stopping the affray, offered his 
services to Camilla, who could not refuse them; and Mrs. Berlinton, active and 
impatient, flew on foremost; with more speed than his lordship could follow, or 
even keep in sight. Indiana was handed out by her new adorer, the young 
baronet; and Eugenia was assisted by her new assailer, the young nobleman.

Edgar, who had hurried to Camilla at the first tumult, was stung to the heart 
to see who handed her away; and, forcing a passage, followed, till Henry, the 
envied Henry, deposited her in the carriage of Mrs. Berlinton.

The confusion in the room, meanwhile, was not likely soon to decrease, for old 
Mr. Westwyn, delighted by this mortifying chastisement to Clermont, would 
permit neither mediation nor assistance on his side; saying, with great glee, 
'It will do him a great deal of good! My poor old friend will bless me for it. 
This is a better lesson than he got in all Leipsic. Let him feel that a Man's a 
Man; and not take it into his head a person's to stand still to be switched, 
when he's doing his duty, according to his calling. Switching a man is a bad 
thing. I can't say I like it. A gentleman should always use good words; and 
then a poor man's proud to serve him; or, if he's insolent for nothing, he may 
trounce him and welcome. I've no objection.'

Miss Margland, meanwhile, had not been remiss in what she esteemed a most 
capital feminine accomplishment, screaming; though, in its exercise, she had 
failed of any success; since, while her voice called remark, her countenance 
repelled its effect. Yet as she saw that not one lady of the group retreated 
unattended, she thought it a disgrace to seem the only female, who, from 
internal courage, or external neglect, should retire alone; she therefore 
called upon Dr. Orkborne, conjuring, in a shrill and pathetic voice, meant more 
for all who surrounded than for himself, that he would protect her.

The Doctor, who had kept his place in defiance of all sort of inconvenience, 
either to himself or to others; and who, with some curiosity, was viewing the 
combat, which he was mentally comparing with certain pugilistic games of old, 
was now, for the first time in the evening, receiving some little 
entertainment, and therefore composedly answered, 'I have a very good place 
here, ma'am; and I would rather not quit it till this scene is over.'

'So you won't come, then, Doctor?' cried she, modulating into a soft whine the 
voice which rage, not terror, rendered tremulous.

Dr. Orkborne, who was any thing rather than loquacious, having given one 
answer, said no more.

Miss Margland appealed to all present upon the indecorum of a lady's being kept 
to witness such unbecoming violence, and upon the unheard-of inattention of the 
Doctor: but a short, 'Certainly!—' 'To be sure, ma'am!—' or, 'It's very 
shocking indeed!' with a hasty decampment from her neighbourhood, was all of 
sympathy she procured.

The entrance, at length, of the master of the house, stopt the affray, by 
calling off the waiter. Clermont, then, though wishing to extirpate old Westwyn 
from the earth, and ready to eat his own flesh with fury at the double disgrace 
he had endured, affected a loud halloo, as if he had been contending for his 
amusement; and protesting Bob, the waiter, was a fine fellow, went off with 
great apparent satisfaction.

'Now, then, at least, sir,' cried Miss Margland, imperiously to the Doctor, 
who, still ruminating upon the late contest, kept his seat, 'I suppose you'll 
condescend to take care of me to the coach?'

'These modern clothes are very much in the way,' said the Doctor, gravely; 'and 
give a bad effect to attitudes.' He rose, however, but not knowing what to take 
care of a lady to a coach meant, stood resolutely still, till she was forced, 
in desperation, to walk on alone. He then slowly followed, keeping many paces 
behind, notwithstanding her continually looking back; and when, with a heavy 
sigh at her hard fate, she got, unassisted, into the carriage, where her young 
ladies were waiting, he tranquilly mounted after her, tolerably reconciled to 
the loss of his evening, by some new annotations it had suggested for his work, 
relative to the games of antiquity.
