
The Computations of Self-Love

Camilla left her sister to accompany Mrs. Berlinton to the Rooms; no other mode 
remaining for seeing Edgar, who, since her rejection, had held back from 
repeating his attempt of visiting Mrs. Berlinton.

In mutual solicitude, mutual watchfulness, and mutual trials of each other's 
hearts and esteem, a week had already passed, without one hope being 
extirpated, or one doubt allayed. This evening was somewhat more, though less 
pleasantly decisive.

Accident, want of due consideration, and sudden recollection, in an agitated 
moment, of the worldly doctrine of Mrs. Arlbery, had led Camilla, once more, 
into the semblance of a character, which, without thinking of, she was acting. 
Born simple and ingenuous, and bred to hold in horror every species of art, all 
idea of coquetry was foreign to her meaning, though an untoward contrariety of 
circumstances, playing upon feelings too potent for deliberations, had eluded 
her into a conduct as mischievous in its effects and as wide from artlessness 
in its appearance, as if she had been brought up and nourished in fashionable 
egotism.

Such, however, was not Camilla: her every propensity was pure, and, when 
reflection came to her aid, her conduct was as exemplary as her wishes. But the 
ardour of her imagination, acted upon by every passing idea, shook her Judgment 
from its yet unsteady seat, and left her at the mercy of wayward 
Sensibility—that delicate, but irregular power, which now impels to all that 
is most disinterested for others, now forgets all mankind, to watch the 
pulsations of its own fancies.

This evening brought her back to recollection.—Young Westwyn, urged by what 
he deemed encouragement, and prompted by his impatient father, spoke of his 
intended visit to Cleves, and introduction to Sir Hugh, in terms of such 
animated pleasure, and with a manner of such open admiration, that she could 
not mistake the serious purposes which he meant to imply.

Alarmed, she looked at him; but the expression of his eyes was not such as to 
still her suspicions. Frightened at what now she first observed, she turned 
from him, gravely, meaning to avoid conversing with him the rest of the 
evening; but her caution came too late; her first civilities had flattered both 
him and his father into a belief of her favour, and this sudden drawback he 
imputed only to virgin modesty, which but added to the fervour of his devoirs.

Camilla now perceived her own error: the perseverance of young Westwyn not 
merely startled, but appalled her. His character, unassuming, though spirited, 
was marked by a general decency and propriety of demeanour, that would not 
presumptuously brave distancing; and awakened her, therefore, to a review of 
her own conduct, as it related or as it might seem, to himself.

And here, not all the guiltlessness of her intentions could exonerate her from 
blame with that finely scrutinizing monitor to which Heaven, in pity to those 
evil propensities that law cannot touch, nor society reclaim, has devolved its 
earthly jurisdiction in the human breast. With her hopes she could play, with 
her wishes she could trifle, her intentions she could defend, her designs she 
could relinquish—but with her conscience she could not combat. It pointed 
beyond the present moment; it took her back to her imprudence with Sir Sedley 
Clarendel, which should have taught her more circumspection; and it carried her 
on to the disappointment of Henry and his father, whom while heedlessly she had 
won, though without the most remote view to beguile, she might seem artfully to 
have caught, for the wanton vanity of rejecting.

While advice and retrospection were thus alike oppressive in accusation, her 
pensive air and withdrawn smiles proved but more endearing to young Westwyn, 
whose internal interpretation was so little adapted to render them formidable, 
that his assiduities were but more tender, and allowed her no repose.

Edgar, who with the most suffering suspense, observed her unusual seriousness, 
and its effect upon Henry, drew from it, with the customary ingenuity of 
sensitive minds to torment themselves, the same inference for his causeless 
torture, as proved to his rival a delusive blessing. But while thus he 
contemplated Henry as the most to be envied of mortals, a new scene called 
forth new surprise, and gave birth to yet new doubts in his mind. He saw 
Camilla not merely turn wholly away from his rival, but enter into 
conversation, and give, apparently, her whole attention to Lord Valhurst, who, 
it was palpable, only spoke to her of her charms, which, alternately with those 
of Mrs. Berlinton, he devoted his whole time to worshipping.

Camilla by this action, meant simply to take the quickest road she saw in her 
power to shew young Westwyn his mistake. Lord Valhurst she held nearly in 
aversion; for, though his vindication of his upright motives at the 
bathing-house, joined to her indifference in considering him either guilty or 
innocent, made her conclude he might be blameless in that transaction, his 
perpetual compliments, enforced by staring eyes and tender glances, wearied and 
disgusted her. But he was always by her side, when not in the same position 
with Mrs. Berlinton; and while his readiness to engage her made this her 
easiest expedient, his time of life persuaded her it was the safest. Little 
aware of the effect this produced upon Edgar, she imagined he would not more 
notice her in any conversation with Lord Valhurst, than if she were discoursing 
with her uncle.

But while she judged from the sincerity of reality, she thought not of the 
mischief of appearance. What in her was designed with innocence, was rendered 
suspicious to the observers by the looks and manner of her companion. The 
pleasure with which he found, at last, that incense received, which hitherto 
had been slighted, gave new zest to an adulation which, while Camilla endured 
merely to shew her coldness to young Westwyn, seemed to Edgar to be offered 
with a gross presumption of welcome, that must result from an opinion it was 
addressed to a confirmed coquette.

Offended in his inmost soul by this idea, he scarce desired to know if she were 
now stimulated most by a wish to torment Henry, or himself, or only by the 
general pleasure she found in this new mode of amusement. 'Be it,' cried he, to 
Dr. Marchmont, 'as it may, with me all is equally over! I seek not to recall an 
attachment liable to such intermissions, such commotions. What would be my 
peace, my tranquillity, with a companion so unstable? A mind all at large in 
its pursuits?—a dissipated wife!—No!—I will remain here but to let her 
know I acquiesce in her dismission, and to learn in what form she has 
communicated our breach to her friends.'

Dr. Marchmont was silent, and they walked out of the room together; leaving the 
deceived Camilla persuaded he was so indifferent with regard to the old peer, 
that all her influence was lost, and all her late exertions were thrown away, 
by one evening's remissness in exciting his fears of a young rival.

Melmond returned to Southampton the next morning with an air of deep and 
settled melancholy. He had found the two brothers together, and the candour of 
his appearance, the plainness of his declaration, the openness with which he 
stated his situation, and his near relationship to Mrs. Berlinton, procured him 
a courteous hearing; and he soon saw that both the father and the uncle, though 
they desired time for consideration and inquiry, were disposed to favour him. 
Mr. Tyrold, though, to his acknowledged recent disappointment of fortune, he 
attributed his address, had so little hope that any man at once amiable and 
rich would present himself to his unfortunate Eugenia, that, when he saw a 
gentleman well educated, well allied, of pleasing manners, and with every 
external promise of a good and feeling character, modestly, and with no 
professions but of esteem and respect, seek her of her friends, he thought 
himself not even entitled to refuse him. He told him, however, that he could 
conclude upon nothing in a matter of such equal interest to himself and his 
wife, without her knowledge and concurrence; and that during the time he 
demanded before he gave a final answer, he required a forbearance of all 
intercourse, beyond that of a common acquaintance. His first design was 
immediately to send for Eugenia home; but the young man appeared so reasonable, 
so mild, so unlike a fortune-hunter, that, constitutionally indulgent where he 
apprehended nothing criminal, he contented himself with writing to the same 
effect to Eugenia, fully satisfied of her scrupulous punctuality, when once his 
will was known.

Melmond, though thus well received, returned back to Southampton with any air 
rather than that of a bridegroom. The order, not to wait upon Eugenia in 
private, was the only part of his task he performed with satisfaction; for 
though a mind really virtuous made him wish to conquer his repugnance to his 
future partner, he felt it could not be by comparing her with Indiana.

Eugenia received the letter of her father, written in his own and her uncle's 
name, with transport; and, to testify her grateful obedience, resolved to name 
the impending transaction to no one, and even to relinquish her visits to Mrs. 
Berlinton, and only to see Melmond when accident brought him before her in 
public.

But Mrs. Mittin, through words casually dropt, or conversations not very 
delicately overheard, soon gathered the particulars of her situation, which 
happily furnished her with a new subject for a gossiping visit to Miss Margland 
and Indiana. The first of these ladies received the news with unconcern, rather 
pleased than otherwise, that the temptation of an heiress should be removed 
from any rivalry with the charms of her fair pupil; who, by no means, however, 
listened to the account with equal indifference. The sight of Melmond at 
Southampton, with the circumstance of his being brother to the Honourable Mrs. 
Berlinton, had awakened all the pleasure with which she had first met his 
impassioned admiration; and while she haughtily expected from every public 
exhibition, 'to bring home hearts by dozens,' the secret point she had in view, 
was shewing Melmond that her power over others was as mighty as it had been 
over himself. She had not taken the trouble to ask with what end: what was 
passed never afforded her an observation; what was to come never called forth 
an idea. Occupied only by the present moment, things gone remained upon her 
memory but as matters of fact, and all her expectations she looked forward to 
but as matters of course. To lose, therefore, a conquest she had thought the 
victim of her beauty for life, was a surprise nearly incredible; to lose him to 
Eugenia an affront scarcely supportable; and she waited but an opportunity to 
kill him with her disdain. But Melmond, who dreaded nothing so much as an 
interview, availed himself of the commands of Mr. Tyrold, in not going to the 
lodgings of Eugenia, and lived absorbed in a melancholy retirement, which books 
alone could a little alleviate.

The conclusion of the letter of Mr. Tyrold gave to Camilla as much pain as 
every other part of it gave to Eugenia pleasure: it was an earnest and 
parentally tender prayer, that the alliance with Melmond, should his worth 
appear such as to authorise its taking place, might prove the counterpart to 
the happiness so sweetly promised from that of her sister with Edgar.

While Camilla sighed to consider how wide from the certainty with which he 
mentioned it was such an event, she blushed that he should thus be uninformed 
of her insecurity: but while a reconciliation was not more her hope than her 
expectation with every rising sun, she could not endure to break his repose 
with the knowledge of a suspense she thought as disgraceful as it was unhappy. 
Yet her present scheme to accelerate its termination, became difficult even of 
trial.

The obviously serious regard of Henry was a continual reproach to her; and the 
undisguised approbation of his father was equally painful. Yet she could now 
only escape them by turning to some other, and that other was necessarily Lord 
Valhurst, whose close siege to her notice forced off every assailant but 
himself. This the deluded Camilla thought an expedient the most innoxious; and 
gave to him so much of her time, that his susceptibility to the charms of youth 
and beauty was put to a trial beyond his fortitude; and, in a very few days, 
notwithstanding their disproportion in age, his embarrassed though large 
estates, and the little or no fortune which she had in view, he determined to 
marry her: for when a man of rank and riches resolves to propose himself to a 
woman who has neither, he conceives his acceptance not a matter of doubt.

In any other society, his admiration of Camilla might easily, like what he had 
already experienced and forgotten for thousands of her sex, have escaped so 
grave or decided a tendency; but in Mrs. Berlinton he saw so much of youth and 
beauty bestowed upon a man whom he knew to be his own senior in age, that the 
idea of a handsome young wife was perpetually present to him. He weighed, like 
all people who seek to entice themselves to their own wishes, but one side of 
the question; and risked, like all who succeed in such self-seduction, the 
inconvenience of finding out the other side too late. He saw the attractions of 
his fair kinswoman; but neglected to consider of how little avail they were to 
her husband; he thought, with exultation of that husband's age, and almost 
childishness; but forgot to take into the scales, that they had obtained from 
his youthful choice only disgust and avoidance.

While he waited for some trinkets, which he had ordered from town, to have 
ready for presenting with his proposals, Edgar only sought an opportunity and 
courage to take his last farewell. Whenever Camilla was so much engaged with 
others that it was impossible to approach her, he thought himself capable of 
uttering an eternal adieu; but when, by any opening, he saw where and how he 
might address her, his feet refused to move, his tongue became parched, and his 
pleading heart seemed exclaiming: O, not to-night! yet, yet, another day, ere 
Camilla is parted with for ever!

But suddenly, soon after, Camilla ceased to appear. At the rooms, at the plays, 
at the balls, and at the private assemblies, Edgar looked for her in vain. Her 
old adulator, also, vanished from public places, while her young admirer and 
his father hovered about in them as usual, but spiritless, comfortless, and as 
if in the same search as himself.
