
A Water Party

The ball dress of Camilla was not yet ready, when she set out for the amusement 
of the morning. Melmond, upon this occasion, was forced into the excursion; his 
sister represented, so pathetically, the ungrateful ill-breeding of 
sequestering himself from a company of which it must so publicly be judged 
Eugenia would make one, with the impossibility of for ever escaping the sight 
of Indiana, that he could not, in common decency, any longer postpone the 
double meeting he almost equally dreaded.

And this, with all that could aggravate its misery, from seeing the two objects 
together, immediately occurred. Sir Hugh Tyrold's coach, containing Miss 
Margland, Indiana, Eugenia, and Dr. Orkborne, was arrived just before that of 
Mrs. Berlinton; and, the morning being very fine, they had just alighted, to 
join the company assembling upon the beach for the expedition. Miss Margland 
still continued to exact the attendance of the Doctor, though his wry looks and 
sluggish pace always proclaimed his ill will to the task. But Clermont, the 
only proper beau for her parties, was completely unattainable. He had connected 
himself with young Halder, and his associates, from whom, while he received 
instructions relative to the stables and the dog-kennels, he returned, with 
suitable edification, lessons on the culinary art.

Melmond, deeply distressed, besought his sister not to alight till the last 
moment. She pitied him too sincerely not to comply; and, in a very short time, 
she had herself an aggregate of almost all the gentlemen on the beach before 
the coach.

Among these, the first to press forward were the two Westwyns, each enraptured 
to again see Camilla; and the most successful in obtaining notice was Lord 
Valhurst, with whom Camilla still thought it prudent, however irksome, to 
discourse, rather than receive again the assiduities of Henry: but her mind, 
far from them all, was hovering on the edge of the shore, where Edgar was 
walking.

Edgar, for some time past, had joined the utmost uneasiness what conduct to 
pursue with regard to the friends of Camilla, to the heart-rending decision of 
parting from her for ever. He soon learnt the new and dangerous manner in which 
Mrs. Berlinton spent her evenings, and the idea that most naturally occurred to 
him, was imparting it to Mr. Tyrold. But in what way could he address that 
gentleman, without first knowing if Camilla had acquainted him with the step 
she had taken? He felt too strongly the severe blow it would prove, not to wish 
softening it with every palliation; and while these still lingering feelings 
awed his proceedings, his servant learnt, from Molly Mill, that Melmond had 
been favourably received at Cleves, as a suitor to Eugenia. Finding so near an 
alliance likely to take place with the brother, he gave up his plan of 
remonstrating against the sister, except in private counsel to Camilla; for 
which, and for uttering his fearful adieu, he was now waiting but to speak to 
her unobserved.

Still, however, with pain unabating he saw the eager approach to her of Henry, 
with disgust that of Lord Valhurst, and with alarm the general herd.

Lord Pervil, the young nobleman who deemed it worth while to be at the expence 
of several hundred pounds, in order to let the world know how old he was, now, 
with his mother, a widow lady, and some other relations, came down in a superb 
new equipage, to the water-side. Mrs. Berlinton could not be so singular, as 
not to join in the general crowd, that flocked around them with 
congratulations; and all parties, in a few minutes, were assembled on one spot.

Edgar, when he had spoken to the group to which the honours of the day 
belonged, made up to Camilla, gravely enquired after her health; and then 
placed himself as near to her as he was able, in the hope of conferring with 
her when the company began to move.

Her spirits now rose, and her prospects re-opened to their wished termination. 
All her regret was for Henry, who saw her present avoidance, and bemoaned her 
long absence, with a sadness that reproached and afflicted her.

A very fine yacht, and three large pleasure-boats, were in readiness for this 
company, surrounded by various other vessels of all sorts and conditions, which 
were filled with miscellaneous parties, who meant to partake the same gales for 
their own diversion or curiosity. The invited set was now summoned to the 
water, Lord Pervil and his relations leading the way by a small boat to the 
yacht, to which Mrs. Berlinton and the Cleves party were particularly selected 
guests.

Camilla, depending upon the assistance of Edgar, in passing through the boat to 
the yacht, so obviously turned from Henry, that he lost all courage for 
persevering in addressing her, and was even, though most unwillingly, retiring 
from a vicinity in which he seemed palpably obtrusive, had not his father 
insisted upon detaining him, whispering, 'Be of good heart, Hal! the girl will 
come round yet.'

Edgar kept equally near her, with a design that was the counterpart of her own 
wish, of offering her his hand when it was her turn to enter the boat; but they 
were both disappointed, the Peer, not waiting that rotation, presented her his 
arm as soon as Lady Pervil had led the way. There was no redress, though 
Camilla was as much provoked as either of the young rivals.

Lord Valhurst did not long exult in his victory; the unsteadiness of the boat 
made him rather want help for himself, than find force to bestow it upon 
another, and, upon mounting at the helm to pass her on to the yacht, he 
tottered, his foot slipt, and he must have sunk between the two vessels, had 
not a waterman caught him up, and dragged him into the yacht, with no further 
misfortune than a bruised shin, wet legs and feet, and a deplorably rueful 
countenance, from mingled fright and mortification.

Edgar, not wholly unsuspicious such an accident might happen, was darting into 
the boat to snatch Camilla from its participation, when he felt himself 
forcibly pulled back, and saw, at the same moment, Henry, who had also started 
forward, but whom nothing had retarded, anticipate his purpose, and aid her 
into the yacht.

Looking round to see by what, or by whom, he had so unaccountably been stopt, 
he perceived old Mr. Westwyn, his forefinger upon his nose in sign of silence 
and secrecy, grasping him by the coat.

'What is the humour of this, Sir?' cried he, indignantly.

Mr. Westwyn, still making his token for discretion, and bending forward to 
speak in his ear, said, 'Do, there's a good soul, let my boy help that young 
lady. Hal will be much obliged to you, I can tell you; and he's a very good 
lad.'

The nature of Edgar was too candid to suffer his wrath to resist a request so 
simple in sincerity; but deeply he sighed to find, by its implication, that the 
passion of Henry was thus still fed with hopes.

The passing of other ladies, with their esquires, prevented him, who had no 
lady he wished to conduct, from making his way yet into the yacht; and the 
honest old gentleman, detained by the same reason, entered promptly into the 
history of the present situation of his son with regard to Camilla; relating, 
frankly, that he thought her the sweetest girl in the world, except that she 
did not know her own mind; for she had been so pleased with his son first of 
all, that he really thought he should oblige her by making it a match: 'which I 
could not,' added he, 'have the heart to refuse to a girl that gave the boy 
such a good character. You'd be surprised to know how she took to him! you may 
be proud, says she to me, you may be proud of your son! which is what I shall 
never forget; for though I loved Hal just the same before, I never could tell 
but what it was only because he was my own. And I'm so afraid of behaving like 
a blind old goose, that I often snub Hal, when he's no more to blame than I am 
myself, for fear of his getting out of my hands, and behaving like a certain 
young man he has been brought up with, and who, I assure you, deserves to have 
his ears cropt ten times a day, for one piece of impudence or other. I should 
not have been sorry if he'd fallen into the water along with that old lord, 
whom I don't wish much good to neither; for, between friends, it seems to me 
that it's he that has put her out of conceit with my poor Hal: for all of a 
sudden, nobody can tell why nor wherefore, she takes it into her head there's 
nothing else worth listening to, but just his old compliments. And my poor Hal, 
after thinking she had such a kindness for him, that he had nothing to do but 
put on his best coat—for I told him I'd have none of his new-fangled modes of 
affronting my worthy old friend, by doing to him like a postillion, with a 
cropt head, and half a coat—after thinking he'd only to ask his consent, for 
he'd got mine without ever a word, all at once, without the least quarrel, or 
either I or Hal giving her the least offence, she won't so much as let him 
speak to her; but turns off to that old fellow that tumbled into the water 
there, and had near made her slip in after, if it had not been for my son's 
stopping her, which I sha'n't forget your kindness in letting him do; but 
what's more, she won't speak to me neither! though all I want is to ask her the 
reason of her behaviour! which I shall certainly do, if I can catch her any 
five minutes away from that lord; for you'll never believe what good friends we 
were, before she took so to him. We three, that is, she and I, and Hal, used to 
speak to nobody else, scarce. Poor Hal thought he'd got it all his own way. And 
I can't but own I thought as much myself; for there was no knowing she'd hold 
herself so above us, all at once. I assure you, if we don't bring her to, it 
will go pretty hard with us; for I like her just as well as Hal does. I'd have 
made over to them the best half of my income immediately.'

Edgar had never yet felt such serious displeasure against Camilla, as seized 
him upon this artless narrative. To have trifled thus, and, as he believed, 
most wantonly, with the feelings and peace of two amiable persons, whether from 
the vanity of making a new conquest, or the tyranny of persecuting an old one, 
shewed a love of power the most unjustifiable, and a levity the most 
unpardonable. And when he considered himself as exactly in the same suspensive 
embarrassment, as a young man of little more than a fortnight's acquaintance, 
he felt indignantly ashamed of so humiliating a rivalry, and a strong 
diminution of regret at his present purpose.

Melmond, meanwhile, pressed by his sister, seconded by his own sense of 
propriety, had forced himself to the Cleves' party; and, after bowing civilly 
to Miss Margland, who courteously smiled upon one who she imagined would become 
master of Cleves, and most profoundly to Indiana, who coloured, but deigned not 
the smallest salutation in return, offered his hand to Eugenia; but with a mind 
so absorbed, and steps so uncertain, that he was unable to afford her any 
assistance; and her lameness and helplessness made her so much require it, that 
she was in danger of falling every moment; yet she felt in Paradise; she 
thought him but enfeebled, as she was enfeebled herself, by a tender 
sensibility; and danger, therefore, was not merely braved, it was dear, it was 
precious to her.

Indiana now consoled her mortification, with the solace of believing a 
retaliation at hand, that would overcome the otherwise indelible disgrace of 
being superseded by Eugenia in a conquest. Full of her own little scheme, she 
imperiously refused all offers of aid, and walked on alone, till crossing the 
boat, she gave a shriek at every step, made hazardous by her wilful rejection 
of assistance, and acted over again the charm of terror, of which she well 
recollected the power upon a former occasion.

These were sounds to vibrate but too surely to the heart of Melmond; he turned 
involuntarily to look at her; her beauty had all its original enchantment; and 
he snatched away his eyes. He led on her whom still less he durst view; but 
another glance, thus surprised from him, shewed Indiana unguarded, unprotected; 
his imagination painted her immediately in a watery grave; and, seeing Eugenia 
safe, though not accommodated, he rushed back to the boat, and with trembling 
respect implored her to accept his aid.

Triumphant, now, she conceived herself in her turn, and looking at him with 
haughty disdain, said, she chose to go alone; and when again he conjured her 
not to risk her precious safety, added, 'You know you don't care about it; so 
pray go to your Miss Eugenia Tyrold.'

Young Melmond, delicate, refined, and well bred, was precisely amongst the 
first to feel, that a reply such as this must be classed amongst the reverse of 
those three epithets—had it come from any mouth but that of Indiana!—but 
love is deaf, as well as blind, to every defect of its chosen object, during 
the season of passion: from her, therefore, this answer, leaving unobserved the 
littleness and spleen which composed it, retained but so much of meaning as 
belongs to announcing jealousy, and in giving him that idea, filled him with 
sensations that almost tore him asunder.

Urged by her pique, she contrived, and with real risk, to jump into the yacht 
alone; though, if swayed by any less potent motive, she would sooner have 
remained in the boat the whole day. But what is the strength which may be put 
upon a par with inclination? and what the general courage that partial 
enterprise will not exceed?

Melmond, who only to some amiable cause could attribute whatever flowed from so 
beautiful an object, having once started the idea of jealousy, could give its 
source only to love: the impure spring of envy entered not into his 
suggestions. What, then, was his distraction, to think himself so greatly 
miserable! to believe he was secretly favoured by Indiana, at the instant of 
his first devoirs to another! Duty and desire were equally urgent to be heard; 
he shrunk in utter despondence from the two objects that seemed to personify 
both, and retreated, to the utmost of his power, from the sight of either.

Miss Margland had more than echoed every scream of Indiana, though nobody had 
seemed to hear her. Dr. Orkborne, the only beau she could compel into her 
service, was missing; her eye and voice alike every where demanded him in vain; 
he neither appeared to her view, nor answered her indignant calls.—Nor, 
indeed, though she forced his attendance, had she the most remote hope of 
inspiriting him to any gallantry: but still he was a man, and she thought it a 
mark of consequence to have one in her train; nor was it by any means nothing 
to her to torment Dr. Orkborne with her reproaches. To dispositions highly 
irascible, it is frequently more gratifying to have a subject of complaint than 
of acknowledgment.

The ladies being now all accommodated upon the deck, sailing orders were given, 
when an 'holla! holla!' making the company look round, Lynmere desired to be 
admitted. All the party intended for the yacht were already on board, and Lord 
Pervil told Mr. Lynmere he would find a very good place in one of the pleasure 
boats: but he answered he was just come from them, and preferred going in the 
yacht. Lord Pervil then only hoped the ladies would excuse being a little 
crowded. Edgar had already glided in, and Mr. Westwyn had openly declared, when 
asked to go to one of the boats, that he always went where Hal went, be it 
where it might.

Clermont, now, elbowing his way into a group of gentlemen, and addressing 
himself to young Halder, who was amongst them, said: 'Do you know what they've 
got to eat here?'

'No.'

'What the deuce! have not you examined the larder? I have been looking over the 
three boats,—there's nothing upon earth!—so I came to see if I could do any 
better here.'

Halder vowed if there were nothing to eat, he would sooner jump over board, and 
swim to shore, than go starving on.

'Starving?' said Mr. Westwyn, 'why I saw, myself, several baskets of provisions 
taken into each of the boats.'

'Only ham and fowls,' answered Clermont, contemptuously.

'Only ham and fowls? why what would you have?'

'O the d——l,' answered he, making faces, 'not that antediluvian stuff! any 
thing's better than ham and fowls.'

'Stilton cheese, for instance?' cried Mr. Westwyn, with a wrathful sneer, that 
made Clermont, who could not endure, yet, for many reasons, could not resent 
it, hastily decamp from his vicinity.

Mr. Westwyn, looking after the young epicure with an expression of angry scorn, 
now took the arm of Edgar, whose evident interest in his first communication 
encouraged further confidence, and said: 'That person that you see walk that 
way just now, is a fellow that I have a prodigious longing to give a good 
caning to. I can't say I like him; yet he's nephew and heir to the very best 
man in the three kingdoms. However, I heartily hope his uncle will disinherit 
him, for he's a poor fool as well as a sorry fellow. I love to speak my mind 
plainly.'

Edgar was ill-disposed to conversation, and intent only upon Camilla, who was 
now seated between Mrs. Berlinton and Eugenia, and occupied by the fine 
prospects every where open to her; yet he explained the error of Clermont's 
being heir, as well as nephew, to Sir Hugh; at which the old gentleman, almost 
jumping with surprise and joy, said: 'Why, then who's to pay all his debts at 
Leipsic? I can't say but what I'm glad to hear this. I hope he'll be sent to 
prison, with all my heart, to teach him a little better manners. For my old 
friend will never cure him; he spoils young people prodigiously. I don't 
believe he'd so much as give 'em a horse-whipping, let 'em do what they would. 
That i'n't my way. Ask Hal!'

Here he stopt, disturbed by a new sight, which displaced Clermont from his 
thoughts.

Camilla, to whom the beauties of nature had mental, as well as visual charms, 
from the blessings, as well as pleasure, she had from childhood been instructed 
to consider as surrounding them, was so enchanted by the delicious scenery 
every way courting her eyes, the transparent brightness of the noble piece of 
water upon which she was sailing, the richness and verdure of its banks, the 
still and gently gliding motion of the vessel, the clearness of the heavens, 
and the serenity of the air, that all her cares, for a while, would have been 
lost in admiring contemplation, had she not painfully seen the eternal watching 
of Henry for her notice, and gathered from the expression of his eyes, his 
intended expostulation. The self-reproach with which she felt how ill she could 
make her defence, joined to a sincere and generous wish to spare him the 
humiliation of a rejection, made her seek so to engage herself, as to prevent 
the possibility of his uttering two sentences following. But as this was 
difficult with Eugenia, who was lost in silent meditation upon her own 
happiness, or Mrs. Berlinton, who was occupied in examining the beauty so fatal 
to the repose of her brother, she had found such trouble in eluding him, that, 
when she saw Lord Valhurst advance from the cabin, where he had been drying and 
refreshing himself, she welcomed him as a resource, and, taking advantage of 
the civility she owed him for what he had suffered in esquiring her, gave him 
her sole attention; always persuaded his admiration was but a sort of old 
fashioned politeness, equally without design in itself, or subject for comment 
in others.

But what is so hard to judge as the human heart? The fairest observers 
misconstrue all motives to action, where any received prepossession has found 
an hypothesis. To Edgar this conduct appeared the most degrading fondness for 
adulation, and to Mr. Westwyn a tyrannical caprice, meant to mortify his son. 
'I hope you saw that! I hope you saw that!' cried he, 'for now I don't care a 
pin for her any longer! and if Hal is such a mere fool as ever to think of her 
any more, I'll never see his face again as long as I live. After looking askew 
at the poor boy all this time, to turn about and make way for that nasty old 
fellow; as who should say, I'll speak to nothing but a lord! is what I shall 
never forgive; and I wish I had never seen the girl, nor Hal neither. I can't 
say I like such ways. I can't abide 'em.'

A sigh that then escaped Edgar, would have told a more discerning person, that 
he came in for his ample share in the same wish.

'And, after all,' continued he, 'being a lord is no such great feat that ever I 
could learn. Hal might be a lord too, if he could get a title. There is nothing 
required for it but what any man may have; nobody asks after what he can do, or 
what he can say. If he's got a good head, it's well; and if he has not, it's 
all one. And that's what you can't say of such a likely young fellow as my son. 
You may see twenty for one that's as well looking. Indeed, to my mind, I don't 
know that ever I saw a prettier lad in my life. So she might do worse, I 
promise her, though she has used my son so shabbily. I don't like her the 
better for it, I assure her; and so you may tell her, if you please. I'm no 
great friend to not speaking my mind.'

The fear of being too late for the evening's arrangements, made Lord Pervil, 
after a two hours sail, give orders for veering about: the ladies were advised 
to go into the cabin during this evolution, and Camilla was amongst those who 
most readily complied, for the novelty of viewing what she had not yet seen. 
But when, with the rest, she was returning to the deck, Lord Valhurst, who had 
just descended, entreated her to stop one moment.

Not at all conjecturing his reason, she knew not how to refuse, but innocently 
begged him to speak quick, as she was in haste, not to lose any of the 
beautiful landscapes they were passing.

'Ah what,' cried the enamoured peer, 'what in the world is beautiful in any 
comparison with yourself? To me no possible object can have such charms; and I 
have now no wish remaining but never to lose sight of it.'

Amazed beyond all measure, she stared at him a moment in silence, and then, 
confirmed by his looks that he was serious, would have left the cabin with 
precipitance: but, preventing her from passing; 'Charming Miss Tyrold!' he 
cried, 'let the confession of my flame meet your favour, and I will instantly 
make my proposals to your friends.'

To Camilla this offer appeared as little delicate, as its maker was attractive; 
yet she thought herself indebted for its general purport, and, as soon as her 
astonishment allowed her, gracefully thanked him for the honour of his good 
opinion, but entreated him to make no application to her friends, as it would 
not be in her power to concur in their consent.

Concluding this to be modest shyness, he was beginning a passionate 
protestation of the warmth of his regard, when the effusion was stopt by the 
appearance of Edgar.

Little imagining so serious a scene to be passing as the few words he now 
gathered gave him to understand, his perplexity at her not returning with the 
other ladies, made him suggest this to be a favourable moment to seize for 
following her himself, and demanding the sought, though dreaded conference. But 
when he found that his lordship, instead of making, as he had supposed, his 
usual fond, yet unmeaning compliments, was pompously offering his hand, he 
precipitately retired.

No liveliness of temper had injured in Camilla the real modesty of her 
character. A sense, therefore, of obligation for this partiality accompanied 
its surprise, and was preparing her for repeating the rejection with 
acknowledgments though with firmness, when the sight of Edgar brought an 
entirely new train of feelings and ideas into her mind. O! happy moment! 
thought she; he must have heard enough of what was passed to know me, at least, 
to be disinterested! he must see, now, it was himself, not his situation in 
life, I was so prompt in accepting—and if again he manifests the same 
preference, I may receive it with more frankness than ever, for he will see my 
whole heart, sincerely, singly, inviolably his own!

Bewitched with this notion, she escaped from the peer, and ran up to the deck, 
with a renovation of animal spirits, so high, so lively, and so buoyant, that 
she scarce knew what she said or did, from the uncontroulable gaiety, which 
made every idea dance to a happiness new even to her happy mind. Whoever she 
looked at, she smiled upon; to whatever was proposed, she assented: scarce 
could she restrain her voice from involuntarily singing, or her feet from 
instinctively dancing.

Edgar, compared with what he now felt, believed that hitherto he had been a 
stranger to what wonder meant. Is this, thought he, Camilla? Has she wilfully 
fascinated this old man seriously to win him, and has she won him but to 
triumph in the vanity of her conquest? How is her delicacy perverted! what is 
become of her sensibility? Is this the artless Camilla? modest as she was gay, 
docile as she was spirited, gentle as she was intelligent? O how spoilt! how 
altered! how gone!

Camilla, little suspicious of this construction, thought it would be now 
equally wrong to speak any more with either Henry or Lord Valhurst, and talked 
with all others indiscriminately, changing her object with almost every speech.

A moment's reflection would have told her, that quietness alone, in her present 
situation, could do justice to the purity of her intentions: but reflection is 
rarely the partner of happiness in the youthful breast; it is commonly brought 
by sorrow, and flies at the first dawn of returning joy.

Thus, while she dispensed to all around, with views the most innocent, her gay 
and almost wild felicity, the very delight to which she owed her animation, of 
believing she was evincing to Edgar with what singleness she was his own, gave 
her the appearance, in his judgment, of a finished, a vain, an all-accomplished 
coquette. The exaltation of her ideas brightened her eyes into a vivacity 
almost dazzling, gave an attraction to her smiles that was irresistible, the 
charm of fascination to the sound of her voice, to her air a thousand nameless 
graces, and to her manner and expression an enchantment.

Powers so captivating, now for the first time united with a facility of 
intercourse, soon drew around her all the attendant admiring beaux.

No animal is more gregarious than a fashionable young man, who, whatever may be 
his abilities to think, rarely decides, and still less frequently acts for 
himself. He may wish, he may appreciate, internally with justice and wisdom; 
but he only says, and only does, what some other man of fashion, higher in 
vogue, or older in courage, has said or has done before him.

The young Lord Pervil, the star of the present day, was now drawn into the 
magic circle of Camilla; this was full sufficient to bring into it every minor 
luminary of his constellation; and even the resplendent and incomparable beauty 
of Indiana, even the soft and melting influence of the expressively lovely Mrs. 
Berlinton, gave way to the superior ascendance of that varied grace, and 
winning vivacity, which seemed instinctively sharing with the beholders its own 
pleasure and animation.

To Edgar alone this gave her not new charms: he saw in her more of beauty, but 
less of interest; the sentence dictated by Dr. Marchmont, as the watch-word to 
his feelings, were she mine, recurred to him incessantly; alas! he thought, 
with this dissipated delight in admiration, what individual can make her happy? 
to the rational serenity of domestic life, she is lost!

Again, as he viewed the thickening group before her, offering fresh and fresh 
incense, which her occupied mind scarce perceived, though her elevated spirits 
unconsciously encouraged, he internally exclaimed: 'O, if her trusting father 
saw her thus! her father who, with all his tender lenity, has not the blind 
indulgence of her uncle, how would he start! how would his sense of fair 
propriety be revolted!—or if her mother—her respectable mother, beheld thus 
changed, thus undignified, thus open to all flattery and all flatterers, her no 
longer peerless daughter—how would she blush! how would the tint of shame rob 
her impressive countenance of its noble confidence!'

These thoughts were too agitating for observation; his eyes moistened with 
sadness in associating to his disappointment that of her revered and exemplary 
parents, and he retreated from her sight till the moment of landing; when with 
sudden desperation, melancholy yet determined, he told himself he would no 
longer be withheld from fulfilling his purpose.

He made way, then, to the group, though with unsteady steps; his eye pierced 
through to Camilla; she caught and fixt it. He felt cold; but still advanced. 
She saw the change, but did not understand it. He offered her his hand before 
Lady Pervil arose to lead the way, lest some competitor should seize it; she 
accepted it, rather surprized by such sudden promptness, though encouraged by 
it to a still further dependance upon her revived and sanguine expectations.

Yet deeper sunk this flattering illusion, when she found his whole frame was 
shaking, and saw his complexion every moment varying. She continued, though in 
a less disengaged manner, her sprightly discourse with the group; for he 
uttered not a word. Content that he had secured her hand, he waited an 
opportunity less public.

Lady Pervil, who possessed that true politeness of a well-bred woman of rank, 
who knows herself never so much respected as when she lays aside mere heraldic 
claims to superiority, would not quit the yacht of which she did the honours, 
till every other lady was conducted to the shore. Edgar had else purposed to 
have detained Camilla in the vessel a moment later than her party, to hear the 
very few words it was his intention to speak. Frustrated of this design, he led 
her away with the rest, still totally silent, till her feet touched the beach: 
she was then, with seeming carelessness, withdrawing her hand, to trip off to 
Mrs. Berlinton; but Edgar, suddenly grasping it, tremulously said: 'Will it be 
too much presumption—in a rejected man—to beg the honour of three minutes 
conference with Miss Tyrold, before she joins her party?'

A voice piercing from the deep could not have caused in Camilla a more 
immediate revulsion of ideas; but she was silent, in her turn, and he led her 
along the beach, while Mrs. Berlinton, attended by a train of beaux, went to 
her carriage, where, thus engaged, she contentedly waited.

'Do not fear,' he resumed, when they had passed the crowd, 'do not fear to 
listen to me, though, once more, I venture to obtrude upon you some advice; let 
it not displease you; it is in the spirit of the purest good will; it is 
singly, solely, and disinterestedly as a friend.'

Camilla was now all emotion; pale she turned, but Edgar did not look at her; 
and she strove to thank him in a common manner, and to appear cool and unmoved.

'My opinion, my fears rather, concerning Mrs. Berlinton, as I find she hopes 
soon for a near connexion with your family, will henceforth remain buried in my 
own breast: yet, should you, to any use hereafter remember them, I shall 
rejoice: though should nothing ever recur to remind you of them, I shall 
rejoice still more. Nor will I again torment you about that very underbred 
woman who inhabits the same house, and who every where boasts an intimacy with 
its two ladies, that is heard with general astonishment: nor yet upon another, 
and far more important topic, will I now touch,—the present evening 
recreation at Mrs. Berlinton's. I know you are merely a spectatress, and I will 
not alarm your friends, nor dwell myself, upon collateral mischiefs, or 
eventual dangers, from a business that in three days will end, by your 
restoration to the most respectable of all protections. All that, now, I mean 
to enter upon, all that, now, I wish to enforce, a few words will comprise, and 
those words will be my—'

He would have said my last but his breath failed him; he stopt; he wanted her 
to seize his meaning unpronounced; and, though it came to her as a thunderbolt 
from heaven, its very horror helped her; she divined what he could not utter, 
by feeling what she could not hear.

'Few, indeed,' cried he, in broken accents, 'must be these final words! but how 
can I set out upon my so long procrastinated tour, with an idea that you are 
not in perfect safety, yet without attempting to point out to you your danger? 
And yet,—that you should be surrounded by admirers can create no 
wonder;—that you should feel your power without displeasure, is equally 
natural;—I scarcely know, therefore, what I would urge—yet perhaps, untold, 
you may conceive what struggles in my breast, and do justice to the conflict 
between friendship and respect, where one prompts a freedom, which the other 
[trembles] to execute. I need not, I think, say, that to offend you is nearly 
the only thing that could aggravate the affliction of this parting.'—

Camilla turned aside from him; but not to weep; her spirit was now re-wakened 
by resentment, that he could thus propose a separation, without enquiring if 
she persisted to desire it.

'I tire you?' resumed he, mournfully; 'yet can you be angry that a little I 
linger? Farewell, however—the grave, when it closes in upon me can alone end 
my prayers for your felicity! I commit wholly to you my character and my 
conduct, with regard to your most honoured father, whom I beseech and conjure 
you to assure of my eternal gratitude and affection. But I am uncertain of your 
wishes; I will, therefore, depart without seeing him. When I return to this 
country, all will be forgotten—or remembered only—' by me, he meant to say, 
but he checked himself, and, with forced composure, went on:

'That I travel not with any view of pleasure, you, who know what I leave—how 
I prize what I lose,—and how lately I thought all I most coveted mine for 
ever, will easily believe. But if earthly bliss is the lot of few, what right 
had I to expect being so selected? Severe as is this moment, with blessings, 
not with murmurs, I quit you! blessings which my life, could it be useful to 
you, should consecrate. If you were persuaded our dispositions would not 
assimilate; if mine appeared to you too rigorous, too ungenial, your timely 
precaution has spared more misery than it has inflicted. How could I have borne 
the light, when it had shewn me Camilla unhappy—yet Camilla my own—?'

His struggle here grew vain, his voice faltered; the resentment of Camilla 
forsook her; she raised her head, and was turning to him her softened 
countenance, and filling eyes, when she saw Melmond, and a party of gentlemen, 
fast approaching her from Mrs. Berlinton. Edgar saw them too, and cutting short 
all he meant to have added, kissed, without knowing what he did, the lace of 
her cloak, and ejaculating, 'Be Heaven your guard, and happiness your portion!' 
left her hand to that of Melmond, which was held out to her, and slightly 
bowing to the whole party, walked slowly, and frequently looking back, away: 
while Camilla, nearly blinded now by tears that would no longer be restrained, 
kept her eyes fixedly upon the earth, and was drawn, more dead than alive, by 
Melmond to the coach.
