
An Adieu

Lost to all happiness, and for the first time in her life, divested of hope, 
Camilla at a late hour returned to Mrs. Berlinton's. And here, her 
heart-breaking disappointment received the cruel aggravation of the most severe 
self-reproach, when, in facing the mirror to deposit her ornaments upon the 
toilette table, she considered the expensive elegance of her whole dress, now, 
even in her own estimation, by its abortive purpose, rendered glaringly 
extravagant. Since her project had failed, she saw the impropriety of having 
risked so much in its attempt; and a train of just reflections ensued, to which 
her understanding was always equal, though her gaiety was seldom disposed. 
'Would Edgar,' thought she, 'wait the event of a meeting at a ball to decide 
his conduct? Had he not every title to claim a conference with me, if he had 
the smallest inclination? Rejected as he calls himself, I had not pretended to 
demand our separation from any doubts, any displeasure of my own. From the 
moment he suffered me to quit, without reclamation, the roof under which I had 
proposed our parting, I ought to have seen it was but his own desire, perhaps 
design, I was executing. And all the reluctance he seemed to feel, which so 
weakly I attributed to regard, was but the expiring sensibility of the last 
moment of intercourse. Not with murmurs, he says, he will quit me—nor with 
murmurs will I now resign him!—with blessings, he says, he leaves me—O 
Edgar! mayest thou too be blest! The erring and unequal Camilla deserved thee 
not!'

A more minute examination of her attire was not calculated to improve her 
serenity. Her robe was everywhere edged with the finest Valencienne lace; her 
lilac shoes, sash, and gloves, were richly spangled with silver, and finished 
with a silver fringe; her ear-rings and necklace were of lilac and gold beads; 
her fan and shoe roses were brilliant with lilac foil, and her bouquet of 
artificial lilac flowers, and her plumes of lilac feathers, were here and there 
tipt with the most tiny transparent white beads, to give them the effect of 
being glittering with the dew.

Of the cost of all this she was no judge, but, certain its amount must be high, 
a warm displeasure arose against the incorrigible Mrs. Mittin, who had not only 
taken the pattern, but the value of Mrs. Berlinton's dress for her guide: and a 
yet greater dissatisfaction ensued with herself, for trusting the smallest 
commission to so vain and ungovernable an agent. She could only hope to hoard 
the payment from the whole of her next year's allowance, by living in so 
forbearing and retired a manner, as to require nothing for herself.

The new, but all powerful guest which now assailed her, unhappiness, had still 
kept her eyes from closing, when she was called up to Mr. Tennet, the landlord 
of Higden. Her fuller knowledge of her own hopeless debts, could not make her 
faithless to her engagement; for her acquaintance with misery awakened but more 
pity for the misery of others. She admitted him, therefore, without demur; and 
found he was a land surveyor, who had often been employed by Sir Hugh at 
Cleves. He accepted her verbal promise to be answerable for the rent now due, 
declining her note of hand, which her minority made illegal, and engaging not 
to hurry her for the money; well satisfied, by the Tyrold character in the 
whole county, he might abide by her word of honour, founded upon the known 
munificence of her uncle.

This delay was a relief, as it saved a partial demand, that must have forced an 
abrupt confession of her own debts, or have deceived the baronet into a belief 
she had nothing to solicit.

When this business was transacted, she hastened to Eugenia, to console whose 
sufferings was all that could mitigate her own.

One of the maids then came to say she had forgotten to inform her, that, some 
time after she had set out for Lord Pervil's a stranger, much muffled up, and 
with a hat flapped over his face so as wholly to hide it, had enquired for her, 
and seemed much disturbed when he heard she was at the ball, but said he would 
call again the next day at noon.

No conjecture occurred to Camilla but that this must be Edgar; it was contrary 
to all probability; but no other image could find way to her mind. She 
hastened, inexpressibly perturbed, to her sister, determining to be at home 
before twelve o'clock, and fashioning to herself all the varieties such a 
meeting could afford; every one of which, however they began, ended regularly 
with a reconciliation.

She found Eugenia weeping in bed. She embraced her with the extremest 
tenderness: 'Ah my sister!' said the unhappy mourner, 'I weep not for my 
disappointment, great as it may be—and I do not attempt describing it!—it 
is but my secondary sorrow. I weep, Camilla, for my own infatuation! for the 
folly, the blindness of which I find myself culpable. O Camilla! is it possible 
I could ever—for a moment, a single moment, suppose Melmond could willingly 
be mine! could see his exquisite susceptibility of every thing that is most 
perfect, yet persuade myself, he could take, by choice, the poor Eugenia for 
his wife! the mangled, deformed,—unfortunate Eugenia!'

Camilla, touched to the heart, wept now more than her sister. 'That Eugenia,' 
she cried, 'has but to be known, to leave all beauty, all figure, every 
exterior advantage aloof, by the nobler, the more just superiority of intrinsic 
worth. Let our estimates but be mental, and who will not be proud to be placed 
in parallel with Eugenia?'

She was then beginning her own sad relation, when an unopened letter upon the 
toilette table caught her eye. It had been placed there by Molly Mill, who 
thought her mistress asleep. Struck by the shape of the seal, Camilla rose to 
examine it: what was her palpitation, then, to see the cypher E M, and, turning 
to the other side, to perceive the hand writing of Edgar!

She put it into her sister's hand, with expectation too big for speech. Eugenia 
opened it, and they read it silently together.

To Miss Eugenia Tyrold.

Southampton.

'Tis yet but a short time—in every account but my own—since I thought 
myself forming a legal claim to address Miss Eugenia Tyrold as my sister. Every 
other claim to that affectionate and endearing title has been hers beyond her 
own memory; hers by the filial love I bear her venerated parents; hers, by the 
tender esteem due to the union of almost every virtue. These first and early 
ties must remain for ever. Disappointment here cannot pierce her barbarous 
shafts, fortune cannot wanton in reversing, nor can time dissolve them.——

'O Edgar!' exclaimed Camilla, stopping the reading, and putting her hand, as in 
benediction, upon the paper, 'do you deign to talk of disappointment? do you 
condescend to intimate you are unhappy? Ah, my Eugenia, you shall clear this 
dreadful error!—'tis to you he applies—you shall be peace-maker; restorer!'

Eugenia dried her tears at the thought of so sweet an office, and they read on.

Of the other—yet nearer claim, I will not speak. You have probably known 
longer than myself, its annihilation, and I will not pain your generous heart 
with any view of my sufferings in such a deprivation. I write but to take with 
my pen the leave I dare not trust myself to take by word of mouth; to wish to 
your opening prospects all the happiness that has flown mine, and to entreat 
you to answer for me to the whole of your loved family, that its name is what, 
through life, my ear with most reverence will hear, my heart with most devotion 
will love.

Edgar Mandlebert.

At the kind wish upon her own opening prospects, Eugenia wept afresh; but when 
Camilla took the letter to press to her lips and her heart what he said of his 
sufferings, she perceived at the doubling down, two lines more:—

I am this moment leaving Southampton for the Isle of Wight, whence I shall sail 
to the first port, that the first vessel with which I may meet shall be bound.

'No, my dear Eugenia,' cried she, then colouring, and putting down the letter, 
'your mediation will be spared. He acquaints us he is quitting England. He can 
only mention it to avoid the persecution of an answer. Certainly none shall be 
obtruded upon him.'

Eugenia pleaded that still a letter might overtake him at the Isle of Wight, 
and all misunderstanding might be rectified. 'And then, my sister, all may be 
well, and your happiness renewed.—It has not flown you—like that of 
Eugenia—from any radical cause. Her's is not only gone, past all resource, 
but has left behind it disgrace with sorrow, derision with disappointment!'

Camilla strove to soothe her, but would no longer listen to any mediation; she 
resolved, at once, to write of the separation to her father, and beseech him to 
send for her to Etherington, and never again suffer her to quit that roof, 
where alone her peace was without disturbance, her conduct without reproach. 
Even her debts, now, she felt equal to avowing, for as, far from contracting 
new ones, she meant in future to reside in complete obscurity, she hoped the 
feelings of this moment would procure pardon for her indiscretions, which her 
own sedulous future œconomy should be indefatigable to repair.

Eugenia would not strive longer against a procedure which she deemed dignified, 
and the departure of Camilla was hurried by a messenger, who brought word that 
the strange man, with the flapped hat, was returned, and entreated her, for 
Heaven's sake, to let him speak with her one moment.

Dead, now, to the hope she had entertained of this enquirer, she merely from 
his own urgency complied with his call; for her curiosity was gone since she 
now knew it could not be Edgar.

Edgar, indeed, was actually departed. His heart was loaded with sorrow, his 
prospect seemed black with despondence; but Camilla was lost to that perfect 
confidence, and unbounded esteem, he required to feel for his wife, and no 
tenderness without them, no partial good opinion, nor general admiration, could 
make him wish to lead her to the altar. 'No!' cried he, 'Dr. Marchmont; you 
judged me better than my first passion, and her untried steadiness enabled me 
to judge myself. Misery only could have followed my view of her in the mixt 
society in which the thousand accidents of life might occasionally have placed 
us. I can only be happy with a character as simple in the world, as in 
retirement; as artless at an assembly, as in a cottage. Without that heavenly 
simplicity, the union of all else that renders life desirable, were vain! 
without that—all her enchanting qualities, with which nothing can vie, and 
which are entwined around my heart-strings, were ineffectual to my peace.'

'You are right,' said the Doctor, 'and your timely caution, and early wisdom, 
will protect you from the bitterness of a personal experience like mine. With 
all the charms she assembles, her character seems too unstable for private 
domestic life. When a few years more have blunted the wild vivacity, the 
floating ambition, the changing propensities which now render her inconsistent 
to others, and fluctuating even to herself, she may yet become as respectable, 
as she must always be amiable. But now, ... whoever takes her from the circle 
in which she is playing, will see her lost to all gaiety, though without daring 
to complain, from the restraint of bidden duties, which make the bidder a 
tyrant.'

Edgar shrunk from such a part, and immediately prepared for his long projected 
tour.

He had, originally, purposed visiting Mr. Tyrold before he set out, and 
conversing with him upon the state of danger in which he thought his daughter; 
but his tenderness for her feelings, during his last adieu, had beguiled him of 
this plan, lest it should prove painful, injurious, or inauspicious to her own 
views or designs in breaking to her friends their breach. He now addressed a 
few lines to his revered guardian, to be delivered by Dr. Marchmont; to whom he 
gave discretionary powers, if any explanation should be demanded; though 
clogged with an earnest clause, that he would neither advance, nor confess any 
thing that could hurt Camilla, even a moment, unless to avert from her some 
danger, or substantiate some good.

Dr. Marchmont determined to accompany him to the Isle of Wight, whither he 
resolved to go, and wait for his baggage; and undertook the superintendance of 
his estate and affairs in his absence.

When they were summoned to the little vessel, Edgar changed colour, his heart 
beat quick, and he sighed rather than breathed. He held his hand upon his eyes 
and forehead for a few minutes, in agony inexpressible, then silently gave his 
servant the letter he had written for Eugenia, took the Doctor by the arm, 
walked to the beach, and got aboard; his head still turned wholly towards the 
town, his eyes looking above it, as if seeking to fix the habitation of 
Camilla. Dr. Marchmont sought to draw his attention another way, but it was 
rivetted to the spot they were quitting.

'I feel truly your unhappiness, my dear Mandlebert,' said he, 'that this young 
creature, with defects of so cruel a tendency, mingles qualities of so 
endearing a nature. Judge, however, the predominance of what is faulty, since 
parents so exemplary have not been able to make the scales weigh down on the 
side of right. Alas! Mr. Tyrold has himself erred, in committing, at so early a 
period, her conduct into her own reins. The very virtues, in the first youth, 
are so little regulated by reflection, that, were [they] not watched nor aided, 
they run into extremes nearly as pernicious, though not so unamiable as the 
vices. What instance more than this now before us can shew the futility of 
education, and the precariousness of innate worth, when the contaminating world 
is allowed to seize its inexperienced prey, before the character is fixed as 
well as formed?'

A deeply assenting sigh broke from the bosom of Edgar, whose strained eyes held 
their purpose, till neither beach, nor town, nor even a spire of Southampton, 
were discernible. Again, then, for a moment, he covered them with his hand, and 
exclaimed: 'Farewell! Camilla, farewell!'
