
A Reckoning

What Camilla experienced at this juncture she believed inadmissible of 
aggravation. Even the breaking off with Edgar seemed as a new misfortune from 
the new force which circumstances gave to its affliction. With his sympathising 
aid, how might she have softened the sorrows of her father! how have broken the 
shock of the blow Clermont was preparing for her uncle? But now, instead of 
lessening their griefs, she must herself inflict upon them a heavier evil than 
any they had yet suffered. And how could she reveal tidings for which they were 
so wholly unprepared? how be even intelligible in the history, without exposing 
the guilty Lionel beyond all chance of pardon?

Again she went to counsel with Eugenia, who, with her usual disinterested 
affection, proposed taking the painful business upon herself at their return 
home. Camilla with tears of gratitude accepted the sisterly office, and 
resolved to devote the rest of her short time for Southampton to Mrs. 
Berlinton; who, shocked to see her evident unhappiness, hung over her with the 
most melting tenderness: bewailing alike the disappointment of Eugenia, and the 
conduct of her brother; who now, with exquisite misery, shut himself wholly up 
in his room.

This compassionate kindness somewhat softened her anguish; but when the 
engagements of Mrs. Berlinton called her away, Mrs. Mittin burst briskly into 
her chamber.

'Well, my dear,' cried she, 'I come with better news now than ever! only guess 
what it is!'

Nothing could less conduce to the tranquillity of Camilla than such a desire; 
her conjectures always flowed into the channels of her wishes; and she thought 
immediately that Mrs. Mittin had been informed of her situation, and came to 
her with some intelligence of Edgar.

Mrs. Mittin, after keeping her a full quarter of an hour in suspence, at last 
said: 'Do you know Miss Dennel's going to be married?—though she was fifteen 
only yesterday!—and I am invited to the wedding?'

No surprise had ever yet produced less pleasure to Camilla, who now ceased to 
listen, though Mrs. Mittin by no means ceased to speak, till her attention was 
awakened by the following sentence: 'So, as I am to go to town, to shop with 
her, at her own papa's desire, you can give me the money, you know, my dear, 
and I can pay off your Tunbridge bills for you.'

She then took out of her pockets some accounts, which, she said, she had just 
received; though, in fact, they had been in her possession more than a week: 
but till the invitation of Miss Dennel called her so pleasantly away, she had 
thought it prudent to keep every motive in reserve, that added importance to 
her stay.

Camilla, with the utmost apprehension, took the papers into her hands; they 
were the bills from Tunbridge, of the milliner, the shoe-maker, the 
haberdasher, and the glover, and amounted altogether to sixteen pounds.

The chief articles had been nearly forced upon her by Mrs. Mittin, with 
assurances of their cheapness, and representations of their necessity, that, 
joined to her entire ignorance of the enormous charges of fashion, had led her 
to imagine four or five guineas the utmost sum at which they could be estimated.

What now, then, was her horror! if to sixteen pounds amounted the trifles she 
had had at Tunbridge, what calculation must she make of articles, so infinitely 
more valuable, that belonged to her debts at Southampton? And to whom now could 
she apply? The unhappy situation of her father was no longer an only reason to 
forbear such a call upon him: Lionel, still under age, was flying the kingdom 
with debts, which, be they small as they might, would, to Mr. Tyrold's limited 
income, be as heavy as the more considerable ones of her cousin upon Sir Hugh; 
yet who besides could give her aid? Eugenia, whose yearly allowance, according 
to her settled future fortune, was five times that of her sisters, had given 
what help she had in her power, before she quitted Cleves, upon the affair of 
the horse; and all that remained of a considerable present made for her 
Southampton expedition by her uncle, who in every thing distinguished her as 
his successor and heiress, she had just bestowed upon Lionel, even, as he had 
declared, to her last half crown. Mrs. Berlinton, whose tender friendship 
might, in this emergence, have encouraged solicitation, was involved in debts 
of honour, and wanted money for herself; and to Mrs. Arlbery, her only other 
acquaintance rich enough to give assistance, and with whom she was intimate 
enough to ask it, she already owed five guineas; and how, in conscience or 
decency, could she address her for so much more, when she saw before her no 
time, no term, upon which she could fix for restitution?

In this terrible state, with no one to counsel her, and no powers of 
self-judgment, she felt a dread of going home, that rendered the coming day a 
day of horror, though to a home to which, hitherto, she had turned as the first 
joy of her happiness, or softest solace of any disturbance. Her filial 
affections were in their pristine force; her short commerce with the world had 
robbed them of none of their vivacity; her regard for Edgar, whom she delighted 
to consider as a younger Mr. Tyrold, had rather enlarged than divided them; but 
to return a burthen to an already burthened house, an affliction to an already 
afflicted parent—'No!' she broke out, aloud, 'I cannot go home!—I cannot 
carry calamity to my father!—He will be mild—but he will look unhappy; and 
I would not see his face in sorrow—sorrow of my own creating—for years of 
after joy!'

She threw herself down upon the bed, hid her face with the counterpane, and 
wept, in desperate carelessness of the presence of Mrs. Mittin, and answering 
nothing that she said.

In affairs of this sort, Mrs. Mittin had a quickness of apprehension, which, 
though but the attribute of ready cunning, was not inferior to the keenest 
penetration, possessed, for deeper investigations, by characters of more solid 
sagacity. From the fear which Camilla, in her anguish, had uttered of seeing 
her father, she gathered, there must be some severe restriction in money 
concerns; and, without troubling herself to consider what they might be, saw 
that to aid her at this moment would be the highest obligation; and immediately 
set at work a brain as fertile in worldly expedients, as it was barren of 
intellectual endowments, in forming a plan of present relief, which she 
concluded would gain her a rich and powerful friend for life.

She was not long in suggesting a proposition, which Camilla started up eagerly 
to hear, almost breathless with the hope of any reprieve to her terrors.

Mrs. Mittin, amongst her numerous friends, counted a Mr. Clykes, a 
money-lender, a man, she said, of the first credit for such matters with people 
of fashion in any difficulty. If Camilla, therefore, would collect her debts, 
this gentleman would pay them, for a handsome premium, and handsome interest, 
till she was able, at her own full leisure, to return the principal, with a 
proper present.

Camilla nearly embraced her with rapture for this scheme. The premium she would 
collect as she could, and the interest she would pay from her allowance, 
certain that when her uncle was cleared from his embarrassments, her own might 
be revealed without any serious distress. She put, therefore, the affair wholly 
into the hands of Mrs. Mittin, besought her, the next morning, to demand all 
her Southampton bills, to add to them those for the rent and the stores of 
Higden, and then to transact the business with Mr. Clykes; promising to agree 
to whatever premium, interest, and present, he should demand, with endless 
acknowledgments to herself for so great a service.

She grieved to employ a person so utterly disagreeable to Edgar; but to avert 
immediate evil was ever resistless to her ardent mind.

The whole of the Southampton accounts were brought her early the next morning 
by the active Mrs. Mittin, who now concluded, that what she had conceived to be 
covetousness in Camilla, was only the fear of a hard tyrant of a father, who 
kept her so parsimoniously, that she could allow herself no indulgence, till 
the death of her uncle should endow her with her own rich inheritance.

Had this arrangement not taken place before the arrival of the bills, Camilla, 
upon beholding them, thought she should have been driven to complete 
distraction. The ear-rings and necklace, silver fringes and spangles, feathers, 
nosegay, and shoe-roses, with the other parts of the dress, and the fine 
Valencienne edging, came to thirty-three pounds. The cloak also, that cheapest 
thing in the world, was nine guineas; and various small articles, which Mrs. 
Mittin had occasionally brought in, and others with which Camilla could not 
dispense, came to another five pounds. To this, the rent for Higden added 
eighteen; and the bill of stores, which had been calculated at thirty, was sent 
in at thirty-seven.

The whole, therefore, with the sixteen pounds from Tunbridge, amounted to one 
hundred and eighteen pounds nine shillings.

Struck to the very soul with the idea of what she must have endured to have 
presented, at such a period, so large an account, either at Cleves or at 
Etherington, she felt lifted into paradise by the escape of this expedient, and 
lost sight of every possible future difficulty, in the relief of avoiding so 
severe a present penalty.

By this means, also, the tradesmen would not wait; and she had been educated 
with so just an abhorrence of receiving the goods, and benefiting from the 
labours of others, without speeding them their rights and their rewards, that 
she felt despicable as well as miserable, when she possessed what she had not 
repaid.

Mrs. Mittin was now invested with full powers for the agency, which her journey 
to London would give her immediate means to execute. She was to meet Miss 
Dennel there in two days, to assist in the wedding purchases, and then to 
accompany that young lady to her father's house in Hampshire, whence she could 
visit Etherington, and finally arrange the transaction.

Camilla, again thanking, took leave of her, to consign her few remaining hours 
to Mrs. Berlinton, who was impatient at losing one moment of the society she 
began sincerely to regret she had not more uniformly preferred to all other. As 
sad now with cares as Camilla was with afflictions, she had robbed her 
situation of nearly the only good which belonged to it—an affluent power to 
gratify every luxury, whether of generosity or personal indulgence. Her gaming, 
to want of happiness, added now want of money; and Camilla, with a sigh, saw 
something more wretched, because far deeper and more wilful in error than 
herself.

They mingled their tears for their separate personal evils, with the kindest 
consolation that either could suggest for the other, till Camilla was told that 
Eugenia desired to see her in the parlour.

Mrs. Berlinton, ashamed, yet delighted to meet her again, went down at the same 
time. She embraced her with fondness, but ventured not to utter either apology 
or concern. Eugenia was serious but composed, sighed often, yet both accepted 
and returned her caresses.

Camilla enquired if Miss Margland expected them immediately.

'Yes,' she answered; 'but I have first a little business of my own to 
transact.' Then, turning to Mrs. Berlinton, and forcing a smile, 'You will be 
surprised,' she said, 'to hear me ask for ... your brother!... but I must see 
him before I can leave Southampton.'

Mrs. Berlinton hung her head: 'There is certainly,' she cried, 'no reproach he 
does not merit ... yet, if you knew ... the respect ... the ... the....'

Eugenia rang the bell, making a slight apology, but not listening to what Mrs. 
Berlinton strove to say; who, colouring and uneasy, still attempted to utter 
something softening to what had passed.

'Be so good,' said Eugenia, when the footman appeared, 'to tell Mr. Melmond I 
beg to speak with him.'

Camilla astonished, and Mrs. Berlinton silenced, waited, in an unpleasant 
pause, the event.

Eugenia, absorbed in thought, neither spoke to, nor looked at them, nor moved, 
till the door opened, and Melmond, who durst not refuse so direct a summons, 
though he would have preferred any punishment to obeying it, blushing, bowing, 
and trembling, entered the room.

She then started, half heaved, and half checked a sigh, took a folded note out 
of her pocket-book, and with a faint smile, said, 'I fear my desire must have 
been painful to you; but you see me now for the last time—I hope!—with any 
ill-will.'

She stopt for breath to go on; Melmond, amazed, striving vainly to articulate 
one word of excuse, one profession even of respect.

'Believe me, Sir,' she then continued, 'surprise was the last sensation I 
experienced upon a late ... transaction. My extraordinary personal defects and 
deformity have been some time known to me, though—I cannot tell how—I had 
the weakness or vanity not to think of them as I ought to have done!—--But I 
see I give you uneasiness, and therefore I will be more concise.'

Melmond, confounded, had bowed down his head not to look at her, while Camilla 
and Mrs. Berlinton both wept.

'The sentiments, Sir,' she then went on, 'of my cousin have never been declared 
to me; but it is not very difficult to me to divine what they may be. All that 
is certain, is the unkindness of Fortune, which forbids her to listen, or you 
to plead to them. This, Sir, shall be my care'—she stopt a moment, looking 
paler, and wanting voice; but presently recovering, proceeded—'my happiness, 
let me say, to endeavour to rectify. I have much influence with my kind uncle; 
can I doubt, when I represent to him that I have just escaped making two worthy 
people wretched, he will deny aiding me to make them happy? No! the residence 
already intended at Cleves will still be open, though one of its parties will 
be changed. But as my uncle, in a manner unexampled, has bound himself, in my 
favour, from any future disposition of what he possesses, I have ventured, Sir, 
upon this paper, to obviate any apprehensions of your friends, for the unhappy 
time when that generous uncle can no longer act for himself.'

She then unfolded, and gave him the paper, which contained these words:

'I here solemnly engage myself, if Miss Indiana Lynmere accepts, with the 
consent of Sir Hugh Tyrold, the hand of Frederic Melmond, to share with them, 
so united, whatever fortune or estate I may be endowed with, to the end of my 
life, and to bequeath them the same equal portion by will after my death.

Signed. Eugenia Tyrold.'

Unable to read, yet conceiving the purport of the writing, Melmond was at her 
feet. She endeavoured to raise him, and though extremely affected, said, with 
an air of some pleasantry, 'Shew less surprise, Sir, or I shall conclude you 
thought me as frightful within as without! But no! Providence is too good to 
make the mind necessarily deformed with the body.'

'Ah, Madam!' exclaimed Melmond, wholly overcome, 'the noblest as well as 
softest of human hearts I perceive to be yours——and were mine at my own 
disposal—it must find you resistless!'—

'No more, no more!' interrupted she, penetrated with a pleasure in these words 
which she durst not indulge, 'you shall hear from me soon.—Meanwhile, be Hope 
your motto, Friendship shall be mine.'

She was then going to hold out her hand to him; but her courage failed; she 
hastily embraced Mrs. Berlinton, took the arm of Camilla, and hurried out of 
the house, followed by the footman who had attended her.

Melmond, who had seen the motion of her hand now advancing, now withdrawn, 
would have given the universe to have stamped upon it his grateful reverence; 
but his courage was still less than her own; she seemed to him, on the sudden, 
transformed to a deity, benignly employed to rescue and bless him, but whose 
transcendent goodness he could only, at a distance, and in all humility, adore.

Mrs. Berlinton was left penetrated nearly as much as her brother, and doubtful 
if even the divine Indiana could render him as happy as the exalted, the 
incomparable Eugenia.

The two sisters found Miss Margland in extreme ill-humour waiting their 
arrival, and the whole party immediately quitted Southampton.

It not seldom occurred to Miss Margland to be cross merely as a mark of 
consequence; but here the displeasure was as deep with herself as with others. 
She had entered Southampton with a persuasion her fair pupil would make there 
the establishment so long the promised mede of her confinement; and Indiana 
herself, not knowing where to stop her sanguine and inflated hopes, imagined 
that the fame of her beauty would make the place where it first was exhibited 
the resort of all of fashion in the nation. And the opening of the scene had 
answered to their fullest expectations: no other name was heard but Indiana 
Lynmere, no other figure was admired, no other face could bear examination.

But her triumph, though splendid, was short; she soon found that the overtures 
of eyes were more ready than those of speech; and though one young baronet, 
enchanted with her beauty, immediately professed himself her lover, when he was 
disdained, in the full assurance of higher offers, and because a peer had 
addressed himself to Eugenia, she saw not that he was succeeded by any other, 
nor yet that he broke his own heart. Men of taste, after the first 
conversation, found her more admirable to look at than speak with; adventurers 
soon discovered that her personal charms were her only dower; the common herd 
were repulsed from approaching her by the repulsive manners of Miss Margland; 
and all evinced, that though a passion for beauty was still as fashionable as 
it was natural, the time was past when the altar of Hymen required no other 
incense to blaze upon it.

The governess, therefore, and the pupil, quitted Southampton with equal 
disappointment and indignation; the first foreseeing another long and yawning 
sojourn at Cleves; the second firmly believing herself the most unaccountably 
ill-used person in the creation, that one offer only had reached her, and that 
without repetition, though admired nearly to adoration, she literally rather 
than metaphorically conceived herself a demi-goddess.

One solitary offer to Eugenia, of an every way ruined young nobleman, though a 
blast both to the settlement and the peace of Indiana, was to herself wholly 
nugatory. Intent, at that period, upon dedicating for ever to Melmond her 
virgin heart, she was sorry, upon his account, for the application, but gave it 
not, upon her own, a moment's consideration. This proposition was made upon her 
first arrival, and was followed by no other. She was then, by the account given 
to the master of the ceremonies by Miss Margland, regarded as the heiress of 
Cleves: but, almost immediately after, the report spread by Mrs. Mittin, that 
Camilla was the true heiress, gained such ground amongst the shopkeepers, and 
thence travelled so rapidly from gossip to gossip, and house to house, that 
Eugenia was soon no more thought of; though a species of doubt was cast upon 
the whole party, from the double assertion, that kept off from Camilla, also, 
the fortune seekers of the place.

But another rumour got abroad, that soon entirely cleared Eugenia, not merely 
of lovers but acquaintances; namely, her studies with Dr. Orkborne. This was a 
prevailing theme of spite with Miss Margland, when the Doctor had neglected and 
displeased her; and a topic always at hand for her spleen, when it was angered 
by other circumstances not so easy of blame or of mention.

This, shortly, made Eugenia stared at still more than her peculiar appearance. 
The misses, in tittering, ran away from the learned lady; the beaux 
contemptuously sneering, rejoiced she was too ugly to take in any poor fellow 
to marry her. Some imagined her studies had stinted her growth; and all were 
convinced her education had made her such a fright.

Of the whole party, the only one who quitted Southampton in spirits was Dr. 
Orkborne. He was delighted to be no longer under the dominion of Miss Margland, 
who, though she never left him tranquil in the possession of all he valued, his 
leisure, and his books and papers, eternally annoyed him with reproaches upon 
his absence, non-attendance, and ignorance of high life; asking always, when 
angry, 'If any one had ever heard who was his grandfather?'

The doctor, in return, despising, like most who have it not, whatever belonged 
to noble birth, regarded her and her progenitors as the pest of the human race; 
frequently, when incensed by interruption, exclaiming, 'Where intellect is 
uncultivated, what is man better than a brute, or woman than an idiot?'

Nor was his return to his own room, books, and hours, under the roof of the 
indulgent Sir Hugh, the only relief of this removal: he knew not of the 
previous departure of Dr. Marchmont, and he was glad to quit a spot where he 
was open to a comparison which he felt to be always to his disadvantage.

So much more powerful and more prominent is character than education, that no 
two men could be more different than Dr. Marchmont and Dr. Orkborne, though the 
same university had finished their studies, and the same passion, pursuit, and 
success in respect to learning, had raised and had spread their names and 
celebrity. The first, with all his scholastic endowments, was a man of the 
world, and a grace to society; the second, though in erudition equally 
respectable, was wholly lost to the general community, and alive only with his 
pen and his books. They enjoyed, indeed, in common, that happy and often sole 
reward of learned labours, the privilege of snatching some care from time, some 
repining from misfortune, by seizing for themselves, and their own exclusive 
use, the whole monopoly of mind; but they employed it not to the same 
extension. The things and people of this lower sphere were studiously, by Dr. 
Orkborne, sunk in oblivion by the domineering prevalence of the alternate 
transport and toil of intellectual occupation; Dr. Marchmont, on the contrary, 
though his education led to the same propensities, still held his fellow 
creatures to be of higher consideration than their productions. Without such 
extravagance in the pursuit of his studies, he knew it the happy province of 
literary occupations, where voluntary, to absorb worldly solicitudes, and 
banish for a while even mental anxieties; and though the charm may be broken by 
every fresh intrusion of calamity, it unites again with the first retirement, 
and, without diminishing the feelings of social life, has a power, from time to 
time, to set aside their sufferings.
