
A Hint for Debtors

Mr. Tyrold was well aware that to keep from Sir Hugh the affliction of Camilla, 
he must keep from him Camilla herself: for though her sighs she could suppress, 
and her tears disperse, her voice had lost its tone, her countenance its 
gaiety; her eyes no longer sparkled, her very smiles betrayed anguish. He was 
the last to wonder at her sufferings, for Edgar was nearly as dear to him as 
herself; but he knew not, that, added to this annihilation of happiness, her 
peace was consumed by her secret knowledge of the blows yet impending for 
himself and for her uncle. Concealment, always abhorrent to her nature, had, 
till now, been unknown even to her thoughts; and its weight, from a species of 
culpability that seemed attached to its practice, was, at times, more dreadful 
to bear than the loss even of Edgar himself. The latter blackened every 
prospect of felicity; but the former, still more tremendous to the pure 
principles in which she had been educated, seemed to strike even at her 
innocence. The first wish of an ingenuous mind is to anticipate even enquiry; 
the feeling, therefore, that most heavily weighs it down, is any fear of 
detection.

While they were at breakfast the following morning, the servant brought in the 
name of Dr. Marchmont.

Camilla felt nearly fainting. Why he was come—whence—whether Edgar 
accompanied him—or sent by him any message—whether he were returned to 
Beech Park—or sailed for the Continent——were doubts that pressed so fast, 
and so vehemently upon her mind, that she feared to quit the room lest she 
should meet Edgar in the passage, and feared still more to continue in it, lest 
Dr. Marchmont should enter without him. Mr. Tyrold, who participated in all her 
feelings, and shared the same ideas, gently committed her to Lavinia, and went 
into his study to the doctor.

His own illusion was there quickly destroyed. The looks of Dr. Marchmont boded 
nothing that was happy. They wore not their customary expression. The gravity 
of Mr. Tyrold shewed a mind prepared for ill news, if not already oppressed 
with it, and the doctor, after a few general speeches, delivered the letter 
from Edgar.

Mr. Tyrold received it with a secret shuddering: 'Where,' he said, 'is 
Mandlebert at present?'

'I believe, by this time—at the Hague.'

This sentence, with the grieved, yet still air and tone of voice which 
accompanied it, was death at once to every flattering hope: he immediately read 
the letter, which, conceived in the tenderest terms of reverence and affection, 
took a short and simple, though touchingly respectful leave of the purposed 
connection, and demolished at once every distant view of future conciliation.

He hung his head a moment, and sighed from the bottom of his heart; but the 
resignation which he summoned upon every sorrow was never deaf to his call, and 
when he had secretly ejaculated a short and silent prayer for fortitude to his 
beloved wife, he turned calmly to the doctor, and began conversing upon other 
affairs.

Dr. Marchmont presumed not to manifest the commiseration with which he was 
filled. He saw the true Christian, enduring with humility misfortune, and the 
respectable parent supporting the dignity of his daughter by his own. To the 
first character, complaint was forbidden; to the second, it would have been 
degrading. He looked at him with veneration, but to spare further useless and 
painful efforts, soon took leave.

Mr. Tyrold, shaking hands with him, said, as they were parting, 'when you write 
to Mandlebert, assure him of my constant affection. The world, Dr. Marchmont is 
too full of real evil, for me at least, to cause one moment of unnecessary 
uneasiness to any of its poor pilgrims. 'Tis strange, my dear doctor, this is 
not more generally considered, since the advantage would be so reciprocal from 
man to man. But wrapt up in our own short moment, we forget our neighbour's 
long hour! and existence is ultimately embittered to all, by the refined 
susceptibility for ourselves that monopolizes our feelings.'

Doctor Marchmont, who in this last sentence construed a slight reflection upon 
Edgar, expressively answered, 'Our sensibility for others is not always 
dormant, because not apparent. How much of worth and excellence may two 
characters separately possess, where yet there are disuniting particles which 
impede their harmonizing with each other!'

Mr. Tyrold, powerfully struck, saw now the general nature of the conceptions 
which had caused this lamented breach. He could not concur, but he would not 
attempt to controvert: opinion in this case must have even the precedence of 
justice. If Edgar thought his daughter of a disposition with which his own 
could not sympathise, it were vain to expatiate upon her virtues or her 
sweetness; that one doubt previously taken might mar their assimilating 
efficacy. Comprehending, therefore, the cause at large, he desired no detail; 
the words of Dr. Marchmont, though decisive, were not offensive, and they 
parted perfect friends, each perceiving, yet forgiving, that each cast upon the 
other the error of false reasoning; Edgar to the one, and Camilla to the other, 
appearing faultless in the separation.

But not in the tasks which succeeded were their offices as easily to be 
compared. Dr. Marchmont wrote to Edgar that all was quietly relinquished, and 
his measures were honourably acquitted; while Mr. Tyrold, shut up in his study, 
spent there some of the severest minutes of his life, in struggling for the 
equanimity he coveted to pronounce to his daughter this last doom. Pity for her 
suspence accelerated his efforts, and he then sent for her down stairs.

His utmost composure, in such an interview, was highly necessary for both. The 
pale and trembling Camilla advanced with downcast eyes; but when he took her in 
his arms, and kissed her, a sudden ray of hope shot across her quick 
imagination, and she looked up: an instant was now sufficient to rectify her 
mistake. The tenderness of her father wore no air of congratulation, it was the 
mere offspring of compassion, and the woe with which it was mixt, though mild, 
though patient, was too potent to require words for explanation.

The glance sufficed; her head dropt, her tears in torrents bathed his bosom; 
and she retired to Lavinia while yet neither of them had spoken.

Mr. Tyrold, contented with virtuous exertions, demanded not impossibilities; he 
left to nature that first grief which too early exhortation or controul rather 
inflames than appeases. He then brought her back to his apartment.

He conjured her, there, to remember that she grieved not alone; that where the 
tears flowed not so fast from the eyes, the sources were not dry whence they 
sprung, and that bridled sorrow was sometimes the most suffering.

'Alas, my dearest father, to think you mourn too—and for me!—will that 
lessen what I feel?'

'Yes, my dear child, by a generous duty it will point out to watch that the 
excess of one affliction involve you not in another.'

'What a motive,' she answered, 'for exertion! If the smallest part of your 
happiness—of my honoured mother's—depends upon mine, I shall be unhappy, I 
think, no more!'

A gush of tears ill accorded with this fond declaration; but Mr. Tyrold, 
without noticing them, kindly replied, 'Let your filial affection, my child, 
check the inordinacy of your affliction, and I will accept with pleasure for 
your virtuous mother, and with thanks for myself, the exertion which, beginning 
for our sakes, may lead you to that self denial which is the parent of our best 
human actions, and approximates us the most to what is divine.'

Broken-hearted as was Camilla, her sorrows would, at least apparently, have 
abated from consolation so tender, if all she felt had been known; if no latent 
and lurking evil had hung upon her spirits, defeating all argument, and 
blighting all comfort, by the cruel consciousness of concealed mischief, which 
while incessantly she studied the best moment for revealing, accident might 
prematurely betray.

Upon this subject her thoughts were unremittingly bent, till, in a few days 
time, she received a letter from Mrs. Mittin, informing her she had just seen 
the money-lender, Mr. Clykes, who, finding her so much under age, would not 
undertake the business for less than ten per cent, nor without a free premium 
of at least twenty pounds.

The latter demand, so entirely out of her power to grant, gave to her the 
mental strength she had yet sought in vain; and determining to end this baneful 
secret, she seized her own first moment of emotion to relate to her father the 
whole of her distresses, and cast herself upon his mercy.

I shall be happier, she cried, much happier, as, with tottering steps, she 
hurried to the study; he will be lenient, I know;—and even if not, what 
displeasure can I incur so severe as the eternal apprehension of doing wrong?

But her plan, though well formed, had fixed upon an ill-timed moment for its 
execution. She entered the room with an agitation which rather sought than 
shunned remark, that some enquiry might make an opening for her confession: but 
Mr. Tyrold was intently reading a letter, and examining some papers, from which 
he raised not his eyes at her approach. She stood fearfully before him till he 
had done; but then, still not looking up, he leant his head upon his hand, with 
a countenance so disturbed, that, alarmed from her design, by the apprehension 
he had received some ill tidings from Lisbon, she asked, in a faint voice, if 
the foreign post were come in?

'I hope not!' he answered: 'I should look with pain, at this moment, upon the 
hand of your unhappy mother!'

Camilla, affrighted, knew not now what to conjecture; but gliding into her 
pocket the letter of Mrs. Mittin, stood suspended from her purpose.

'What a reception,' he presently added, 'is preparing for that noblest of women 
when her exile may end! That epoch, to which I have looked forward as the 
brightener of my every view upon earth—how is it now clouded!'

Giving her, then, the letter and papers; 'The son,' he said, 'who once I had 
hoped would prove the guardian of his sisters, the honour of his mother's days, 
the future prop of my own—See, Camilla, on how sandy a foundation mortal man 
builds mortal hopes!'

The letter was from a very respectable tradesman, containing a complaint that, 
for the three years Lionel had been at the University, he had never paid one 
bill, though he continually ordered new articles: and begging Mr. Tyrold would 
have the goodness to settle the accounts he enclosed; the young gentleman, 
after fixing a day for payment, having suddenly absconded without notice to any 
one.

'The sum, you see,' continued Mr. Tyrold, 'amounts to one hundred and 
seventy-one pounds; a sum, for my income, enormous. The allowance I made this 
cruel boy, was not only adequate to all his proper wants, and reasonable 
desires, but all I could afford without distressing myself, or injuring my 
other children: yet it has served him, I imagine, but for pocket money! The 
immense sums he has extorted from both his uncles, must have been swallowed up 
at a gaming table. Into what wretched courses has he run! These bills, large as 
they are, I regard but as forerunners of others; all he has received he has 
squandered upon his vices, and to-morrow, and the next day, and the next, I may 
expect an encreasing list of his debts, from his hatter, his hosier, his 
shoe-maker, his taylor,—and whoever he has employed.

Camilla, overwhelmed with internal shame, yet more powerful than grief itself, 
stood motionless. These expences appeared but like a second part of her own, 
with her milliner, her jeweller, and her haberdasher; which now seemed to 
herself not less wanton in extravagance.

Surprised by her entire silence, Mr. Tyrold looked up. Her cheeks, rather livid 
than pale, and the deep dismay of her countenance, extremely affected him. The 
kindness of his embraces relieved her by melting her into tears, though the 
speech which accompanied them was, to her consciousness, but reproach: 'Let not 
your sisterly feelings thus subdue you, my dearest Camilla. Be comforted that 
you have given us no affliction yourself, save what we must feel for your own 
undeservedly altered prospects. No unthinking imprudence, no unfeeling 
selfishness, has ever, for an instant, driven from your thoughts what you owe 
to your duty, or weakened your pleasure in every endearing filial tie. Let this 
cheer you, my child; and let us all try to submit calmly to our general 
disappointment.'

Praise thus ill-timed, rather probed than healed her wounds. Am I punished? am 
I punished? She internally exclaimed; but could not bear to meet the eyes of 
her father, whose indulgence she felt as if abusing, and whose good opinion 
seemed now but a delusion. Again, he made her over to the gentle Lavinia for 
comfort, and fearing serious ill effects from added misery, exerted himself, 
from this time, to appear cheerful when she was present.

His predictions failed not to be fulfilled: the application made by one 
creditor, soon reached every other, and urged similar measures. Bills, 
therefore, came in daily, with petitions for payment; and as Lionel still 
wanted a month or two of being of age, his creditors depended with confidence 
upon the responsibility of his father.

Nor here closed the claims springing from general ill conduct. Two young men of 
fashion, hard pressed for their own failures, stated to Mr. Tyrold the debts of 
honour owing them from Lionel: and three notorious gamesters, who had drawn in 
the unthinking youth to his ruin, enforced the same information, with a hint 
that, if they were left unsatisfied, the credit of the young man would fall the 
sacrifice of their ill treatment.

The absence of Mrs. Tyrold at this period, by sparing her daily difficulty as 
well as pain, was rejoiced in by her husband; though never so strongly had he 
wanted her aiding counsel, her equal interest, and her consoling participation. 
Obliged to act without them, his deliberation was short and decisive for his 
measures, but long and painful for their means of execution. He at once 
determined to pay, though for the last time, all the trades people; but the 
manner of obtaining the money required more consideration.

The bills, when all collected, amounted to something above five hundred pounds, 
which was but one hundred short of his full yearly income.

Of this, he had always contrived to lay by an hundred pounds annually, which 
sum, with its accumulating interest, was destined to be divided between Lavinia 
and Camilla. Eugenia required nothing; and Lionel was to inherit the paternal 
little fortune. The portion of Mrs. Tyrold, which was small, the estate of her 
father having been almost all entailed upon Mr. Relvil, was to be divided 
equally amongst her children.

To take from the little hoard which, with so tender a care, he had heaped for 
the daughters, so large a share for the son, and to answer demands so unduly 
raised, and ill deserved, was repulsive to his inclination, and shocked his 
strong sense of equal justice. To apply to Mr. Relvil would be preposterous; 
for though upon him dwelt all his ultimate hopes for Lionel, he knew him, at 
this moment, to be so suffering and so irritated by his means, that to hear of 
any new misdemeanours might incense him to an irrevocable disinheritance.

With regard to Sir Hugh, nothing was too much to expect from his generous 
kindness; yet he knew that his bountiful heart had always kept his income from 
overflowing; and that, for three years past, Lionel had drained it without 
mercy. His preparations, also, for the double marriages had, of late, much 
straitened him. To take up even the smallest part of what, in less expensive 
times, he had laid by, he would regard as a breach of his solemn vow, by which 
he imagined himself bound to leave Eugenia the full property she would have 
possessed, had he died instantly upon making it. Reason might have shewn this a 
tie of supererogation; but where any man conceived himself obeying the dictates 
of his conscience, Mr. Tyrold held his motives too sacred for dispute.

The painful result of this afflicting meditation, was laying before his 
daughters the whole of his difficulties, and demanding if they would willingly 
concur in paying their brother's bills from their appropriate little store, by 
adopting an altered plan of life, and severe self-denial of their present ease 
and elegance, to aid its speedy replacement.

Their satisfaction in any expedient to serve their brother that seemed to fall 
upon themselves, was sincere, was even joyful: but they jointly besought that 
the sum might be freely taken up, and deducted for ever more from the hoard; 
since no earthly gratification could be so great to them, as contributing their 
mite to prevent any deprivation of domestic enjoyment to their beloved parents.

His eyes glistened, but not from grief; it was the pleasure of virtuous 
happiness in their purity of filial affection. But though he knew their 
sincerity, he would not listen to their petition. 'You are not yet,' said he, 
'aware what your future calls may be for money. What I have yet been able to 
save, without this unexpected seizure, would be inadequate to your even decent 
maintenance, should any accident stop short its encrease. Weep not, my dear 
children! my health is still good, and my prospect of lengthened life seems 
fair. It would be, however, a temporal folly as well as a spiritual 
presumption, to forget the precarious tenure of human existence. My life, my 
dear girls, will be happier, without being shorter, for making provisions for 
its worldly cessation.'

'But, Sir! but my father!' cried Camilla, hanging over him, and losing in 
filial tenderness her personal distresses; 'if your manner of living is 
altered, and my dear mother returns home and sees you relinquishing any of your 
small, your temperate indulgencies, may it not yet more embitter her sufferings 
and her displeasure for the unhappy cause? For her sake then, if not for 
ours——'

'Do not turn away, dearest Sir!' cried Lavinia; 'what mother ever merited to 
have her peace the first study of her children, if it is not ours?'

'O Providence benign!' said Mr. Tyrold, folding them to his heart, 'how am I 
yet blessed in my children!—True and excellent daughters of my invaluable 
wife—this little narration is the solace I shall have to offer for the grief 
I must communicate.'

He would not, however, hearken to their proposition; his peace, he said, 
required not only immediate measures for replacing what he must borrow, but 
also that no chasm should have lieu in funding his usual annual sum for them. 
All he would accept was the same severe forbearance he should instantly 
practice himself, and which their mother, when restored to them, would be the 
first to adopt and improve. And this, till its end was answered, they would all 
steadily continue, and then, with cheerful self-approvance, resume their wonted 
comforts.

Mr. Tyrold had too frequent views of the brevity of human life to postpone, 
even from one sun to another, any action he deemed essential. A new general 
system, therefore, immediately pervaded his house. Two of the servants, with 
whom he best could dispense, were discharged; which hurt him more than any 
other privation, for he loved, and was loved by every domestic who lived with 
him. His table, always simple though elegant, was now reduced to plain 
necessaries; he parted with every horse, but one to whose long services he held 
himself a debtor; and whatever, throughout the whole economy of his small 
establishment, admitted simplifying, deducting, or abolishment, received, 
without delay, its requisite alteration or dismission.

These new regulations were quietly, but completely, put in practice, before he 
would discharge one bill for his son; to whom, nevertheless, though his conduct 
was strict, his feelings were still lenient. He attributed not to moral 
turpitude his errours nor his crimes, but to the prevalence of ill example, and 
to an unjustifiable and dangerous levity, which irresistibly led him to treat 
with mockery and trifling the most serious subjects. The punishment, however, 
which he had now drawn upon himself, would yet, he hoped, touch his heart.

But the debts called debts of honour, met not with similar treatment. He 
answered with spirited resentment demands he deemed highly flagitious, 
counselling those who sent them, when next they applied to an unhappy family to 
whose calamities they had contributed, to enquire first if its principles, as 
well as its fortune, made the hazards of gaming amongst its domestic 
responsibilities.
