
A Lover's Eye

The serenity of virtue would now again have made its abode the breast of Mr. 
Tyrold, but for the constant wretchedness to which he saw his daughter a prey. 
With the benignest pity he strove to revive her; a pity unabated by any wonder, 
unalloyed with any blame. His wonder fell all upon Edgar, whom he considered as 
refining away mortal happiness, by dissatisfaction that it was not divine; but 
his censure, which he reserved wholly for vice, exonerated them both. Still, 
however, he flattered himself that ere long, to her youthful mind and native 
cheerfulness, tranquillity, if not felicity, would imperceptibly return, from 
such a union for exertion of filial and sisterly duties: that industry would 
sweeten rest, virtue gild privation, and self-approvance convert every 
sacrifice into enjoyment.

But peace such as this was far from her bosom. While the desertion of Edgar had 
tolled the death bell to all her hopes, an unremitting contention disturbed her 
mind, whether to avow or conceal her situation with regard to the money-lender. 
The reflections of every night brought a dissatisfaction in her conduct, which 
determined her upon an openness the most undisguised for the following morning: 
but timidity, and the desire of reprieve from the fearful task, again, the 
following morning, regularly postponed her purpose.

In the first horror occasioned by her father's distress from the bills of her 
brother, she wrote a supplicating letter to Mrs. Mittin, to intreat she would 
endeavour to quiet her creditors till she could arrange something for their 
payment. And while this produced a correspondence replete with danger, 
difficulty, and impropriety, a new circumstance occurred, which yet more 
cruelly embittered her conflicting emotions. Lavinia, in the virtuous eagerness 
of her heart to forward the general œconomy, insisted wholly to relinquish, 
for this year, her appropriate allowance; declaring that, by careful 
management, she could dispense with anything new, and that the very few 
expences she might find utterly unavoidable, she would demand from time to time 
as they occurred. Camilla, at this proposition, retreated, in agony, to her 
chamber. To make the same was impossible; for how, then, find interest for the 
money-lender? yet to withstand so just an example, seemed a disgrace to every 
duty and every feeling.

Lavinia, who, in her countenance and abrupt departure, read the new distress 
she had incautiously excited, with a thousand self-reproaches followed her. She 
had considered but the common cause when she spoke, without weighing the 
strange appearance of not being seconded by her sister: But her mind was 
amongst the last to covet the narrow praise of insidious comparison; and her 
concern for the proposal she had made, when she saw its effect, was as deep as 
that of Camilla in hearing it, though not attended with the same aggravations.

Mr. Tyrold remained utterly surprized. The generous and disinterested nature of 
Camilla, made it impossible to suspect her restrained by a greater love of 
money than Lavinia; and he could not endure to suppose her late visits to 
public places, had rendered personal œconomy more painful. But he would make 
no enquiry that might seem a reproach; nor suffer any privation or contribution 
that was not cheerful and voluntary.

The purchases for the wedding of Miss Dennel being now made, that young lady 
came down to the country to solemnize her nuptials, accompanied by Mrs. Mittin, 
who instantly visited Camilla. She could settle nothing, she said, with the 
money-lender, without the premium; but she had coaxed all the creditors, by 
assuring them, that, as the debtor was a great heiress, they were certain of 
their money when she came to her estate. Camilla could not endure to owe their 
forbearance to a falsehood; though to convince Mrs. Mittin of her errour, in 
contradiction to the assertion of Lionel, was a vain attempt. The business, 
however, pressed; and to keep back these but too just claimants was her present 
most fervent desire. Mrs. Mittin was amongst the most expert of 
expedient-mongers, and soon started a method for raising the premium. She asked 
to look at what Camilla possessed of trinkets: and the prize ear-rings of 
Tunbridge, the ear-rings and necklace of Southampton, and several small toys 
occasionally given her, were collected. The locket she also demanded, to make 
weight; but neither that, nor the peculiar gifts, as keep-sakes, of her father, 
mother, or uncle, consisting of a seal, a ring, and a watch, would she part 
with. What she would relinquish, however, Mrs. Mittin disposed of to one of her 
numerous friends; but they raised only, when intrinsically valued, sixteen 
pounds. Lavinia then insisted upon coming forward with a contribution of every 
trinket she was worth, save what had the same sacred motives of detention: and 
the twenty pounds, without any ceremony of acknowledgment, were delivered to 
Mr. Clykes; who then took into his own hands the payment of the hundred and 
eighteen pounds; for which he received a bond, signed by Camilla, and witnessed 
by Mrs. Mittin; and another note of hand, promising ten per cent. interest for 
the sum, till the principal were repaid. These two notes, he acknowledged, were 
mere pledges of honour, as the law would treat her as an infant: but he never 
acted without them, as they prevented mistakes in private dealings.

This important affair arranged, Camilla felt somewhat more at ease; she was 
relieved from hourly alarms, and left the mistress to make her confession as 
circumstances directed. But she obtained not for nothing the agency of Mrs. 
Mittin, who was not a character to leave self out of consideration in her 
transactions for others; and at every visit made at Etherington from this time, 
she observed something in the apparel of Camilla that was utterly old 
fashioned, or too mean for her to wear; but which would do well enough for 
herself, when vamped up, as she knew how. Her obligations and inexperience made 
it impossible to her to resist, though, at this season of saving care, she gave 
up nothing which she could not have rendered useful, by industry and 
contrivance.

During this unhappy period at Etherington, a brighter, though not unclouded 
scene, was exhibited at Cleves. Melmond arrived; he was permitted to pay his 
addresses to the fair Indiana, and believed felicity celestial accorded to him 
even upon earth.

But this adored object herself suffered some severe repining at her fate, when 
she saw, from her window, her lover gallop into the park without equipage, 
without domestics, and mounted on a hired horse. The grimacing shrugs of Miss 
Margland shewed she entered into this mortification; and they were nearly 
conspiring to dismiss the ignoble pretender, when a letter, which he modestly 
sent up, from his sister, inviting Indiana to pass a few weeks in Grosvenor 
Square, once again secured the interest of the brother. She suffered, 
therefore, Sir Hugh to hand her down stairs, and the enamoured Melmond thought 
himself the most blest of men.

The sight of such eager enjoyment, and the really amiable qualities of this 
youth, soon completely reconciled the Baronet to this new business; for he saw 
no reason, he said, in fact, why one niece had not as good a right to be 
married first as another. The generous and sentimental Eugenia never ceased her 
kind offices, and steadily wore an air of tolerable cheerfulness all day, 
though her pillow was nightly wetted with tears for her unfortunate lot.

Nor, with all her native equanimity and acquired philosophy, was this a 
situation to bring back serenity. The enthusiastic raptures of Melmond elevated 
him, in her eyes, to something above human; and while his adoration of Indiana 
presented to her a picture of all she thought most fascinating, his grateful 
softness of respect to herself, was penetratingly touching to her already 
conquered heart.

Indiana, meanwhile, began ere long, to catch some of the pleasure she inspired. 
The passionate animation of Melmond, soon not only resumed its first power, but 
became even essential to her. No one else had yet seemed to think her so 
completely a goddess, except Mr. Macdersey, whom she scarce expected ever to 
see again. With Melmond she could do nothing that did not make her appear to 
him still more lovely: and though her whims, thus indulged, became almost 
endless, they but kindled with fresh flame his admiration. If she fretted, he 
thought her all sensibility; if she pouted, all dignity; if her laughter was 
unmeaning, she was made up of innocent gaiety; if what she said was shallow, he 
called her the child of pure nature; if she were angry, how becoming was her 
spirit! if illiberal, how noble was her frankness! Her person charmed his eye, 
but his own imagination framed her mind, and while his enchanted faculties were 
the mere slaves of her beauty, they persuaded themselves they were vanquished 
by every other perfection.

Mr. Tyrold had not yet related Edgar's defection to Sir Hugh; though from the 
moment the time of hope was past, he wished to end that of expectation. But the 
pressure of the affairs of Lionel detained him at Etherington, and he could not 
bear to give grief to his brother, till he could soften its effect by the 
consolation of some residence at Cleves. This time now arrived; and the next 
day was fixed for his painful task, in which he meant to spare Camilla any 
share, when Jacob begged immediate admittance into the study, where Mr. Tyrold 
and his daughters were drinking tea.

His scared look instantly announced ill news. Mr. Tyrold was alarmed, Lavinia 
was frightened, and Camilla exclaimed, 'Jacob, speak at once!'

He begged to sit down.

Camilla ran to get him a chair.

'Is my brother well, Jacob?' cried Mr. Tyrold.

'Why, pretty well, considering, Sir,—but these are vast bad times for us!'

'O! if my uncle is but well,' cried Camilla, relieved from her first dreadful 
doubt, 'all, I hope, will do right!'

'Why, ay, Miss,' said Jacob, smiling, 'I knew you'd be master's best comfort; 
and so I told him, and so he says, for that matter himself, as I've got to tell 
you from him. But, for all that, he takes on prodigious bad. I never saw him in 
the like way, except just that time when Miss Geny had the small pox.'

They all supplicated him to forbear further comments, and then gathered, that a 
money-agent, employed by young Lynmere, had just arrived at Cleves; where, with 
bitter complaints, he related that, having been duped into believing him heir 
to Sir Hugh Tyrold, he had been prevailed with to grant him money, from time to 
time, to pay certain bills, contracted not only there, but in London, for goods 
sent thence by his order, to the amount of near thirteen hundred pounds, 
without the interest, of which he should give a separate account; that he had 
vainly applied to the young gentleman for re-imbursement, who finally assured 
him he was just disinherited by his uncle. No hope, therefore, remained to save 
him from the ruin of this affair, but in the compassion of the Baronet, which 
he now came to most humbly solicit.

While Mr. Tyrold, in silent surprise and concern, listened to an account that 
placed his brother in difficulties so similar to his own, Camilla, sinking back 
in her chair; looked pale, looked almost lifeless. The history of the debts she 
already knew, and had daily expected to hear; but the circumstance of the 
money-lender, and the delusion concerning the inheritance, so resembled her own 
terrible, and yet unknown story, that she felt personally involved in all the 
shame and horror of the relation.

Mr. Tyrold, who believed her suffering all for her uncle, made further 
enquiries, while Lavinia tenderly sustained her. 'Don't take on so, dear Miss,' 
said Jacob, 'for all our hope is in you, as Master and I both said; and he bid 
me tell your papa, that if he'd only give young 'Squire Mandlebert a jog, to 
egg him on, that he might not be so shilly shally, as soon as ever the 
wedding's over, he'd accept his kind invitation to Beech Park, and bide there 
till he got clear, as one may say.'

Mr. Tyrold now required no assigned motive for the excessive distress of his 
daughter, and hastened to turn Jacob from this too terribly trying subject, by 
saying, 'My brother then means to pay these demands?'

'Lauk, yes, Sir! his honour pays every thing as any body asks him; only he says 
he don't know how, because of having no more money, being so hard run with all 
our preparations we have been making this last fortnight.'

Camilla, with every moment encreasing agitation, hid her face against Lavinia; 
but Mr. Tyrold, with some energy, said: 'The interest, at least, I hope he will 
not discharge; for those dangerous vultures, who lie in wait for the weak or 
erring, to encourage their frailties or vices, by affording them means to 
pursue them, deserve much severer punishment, than merely losing a recompense 
for their iniquitous snares.'

This was quite too much for the already disordered Camilla; she quitted her 
sister, glided out of the room, and delivered herself over as a prey no longer 
to sorrow but remorse. Her conduct seemed to have been precisely the conduct of 
Clermont, and she felt herself dreadfully implicated as one of the weak or 
erring, guilty of frailties or vices.

That an uncle so dearly loved should believe she was forming an establishment 
which would afford him an asylum during his difficulties, now every prospect of 
that establishment was over, was so heart-piercing a circumstance, that to her 
father it seemed sufficient for the whole of what she endured. He made her 
over, therefore, to Lavinia, while he hastened to Cleves; for Jacob, when he 
had said all he was ordered to say, all he had gathered himself, and all he was 
able to suggest, finished with letting him know that his master begged he would 
set out that very moment.

The time of his absence was spent by Camilla in an anguish that, at his return, 
seemed quite to have changed her. He was alarmed, and redoubled his tenderness; 
but his tenderness was no longer her joy. He knows not, she thought, whom he 
caresses; knows not that the wounds just beginning to heal for the son, are 
soon to be again opened for the daughter!

Yet her affections were all awake to enquire after her uncle; and when she 
heard that nothing could so much sooth him as her sight, all fear of his 
comments, all terror of exertion, subsided in the possible chance of consoling 
him: and Mr. Tyrold, who thought every act of duty led to cheerfulness, sent to 
desire the carriage might fetch her the next morning.

He passed slightly over to Camilla the scene he had himself gone through; but 
he confessed to Lavinia its difficulty and pain. Sir Hugh had acknowledged he 
had drawn his bankers dry, yet had merely current cash to go on till the next 
quarter, whence he intended to deduct the further expences of the weddings. 
Nevertheless, he was determined upon paying every shilling of the demand, not 
only for the debts, but for all the complicate interest. He would not listen to 
any reasoning upon this subject, because, he said, he had it upon his 
conscience that the first fault was his own, in letting poor Clermont leave the 
kingdom, without clearing up to him that he had made Eugenia his exclusive 
heiress. It was in vain Mr. Tyrold pointed out, that no future hopes of wealth 
could exculpate this unauthorized extravagance in Clermont, and no dissipation 
in Clermont could apologize for the clandestine loan, and its illegal interest: 
'The poor boy,' said he, 'did it all, knowing no better, which how can I 
expect, when I did wrong myself, being his uncle? Though, if I were to have 
twenty more nephews and nieces in future, the first word I should say to them 
would be to tell them I should give them nothing; to the end that having no 
hope, they might all be happy one as another.' All, therefore, that was left 
for Mr. Tyrold, was to counsel him upon the best and shortest means of raising 
the sum; and for this purpose, he meant to be with him again the next day.

This affair, however, with all its reproach for the past, and all its 
sacrifices for the time to come, by no means so deeply affected Sir Hugh as the 
blow Mr. Tyrold could no longer spare concerning Edgar. It sunk to his heart, 
dispirited him to tears, and sent him, extremely ill, to bed.

The chaise came early the next morning, and Mr. Tyrold had the pleasure to see 
Camilla exert herself to appear less sad. Lavinia was also of the party, as he 
meant to stay the whole day.

Eugenia met them in the hall, with the welcome intelligence that Sir Hugh, 
though he had passed a wretched night, was now somewhat better, and 
considerably cheered, by a visit from his old Yorkshire friend, Mr. Westwyn.

Nevertheless, Sir Hugh dismissed him, and everybody else, to receive Camilla 
alone.

She endeavoured to approach him calmly, but his own unchecked emotions soon 
overset her borrowed fortitude, and the interview proved equally afflicting to 
both. The cruel mischiefs brought upon him by Clermont, were as nothing in the 
balance of his misfortunes, when opposed to the sight of sorrow upon that face 
which, hitherto, had so constantly enlivened him as an image of joy: and with 
her, every self-disappointment yielded, for the moment, to the regret of losing 
so precious a blessing, as offering a refuge, in a time of difficulty, to an 
uncle so dear to her.

Mr. Tyrold would not suffer this scene to be long uninterrupted; he entered, 
with a cheering countenance, that compelled them to dry their tears, and told 
them the Westwyns could not much longer be left out, though they remained, well 
contented, for the present, with Miss Margland and his other daughters. 
'Melmond and Indiana,' added he, smiling, 'seem at present not beings of this 
lower sphere, nor to have a moment to spare for those who are.'

'That, my dear brother,' answered the Baronet, 'is all my comfort; for as to 
all the rest of my marrying, you see what it's come to! who could have thought 
of young Mr. Edgar's turning out in the same way? I can't say but what I take 
it pretty unkind of him, letting me prepare at this rate for nothing; besides 
Beech Park's being within but a stone's throw, as one may say, as well as his 
own agreeableness. However, now I've seen a little more of the world, I can't 
say I find much difference between the good and the bad, with respect to their 
all doing alike. The young boys now-a-days, whatever's come to 'em, don't know 
what they'd be at. They think nothing of disappointing a person if once they've 
a mind to change their minds. All one's preparations go for nothing; which they 
never think of.'

Mr. Tyrold now prevailed for the re-admission of Mr. Westwyn, who was 
accompanied by his son, and followed by the Cleves family.

The cheeks of Camilla recovered their usual hue at the sight of Henry, from the 
various interesting recollections which occurred with it. She was seen herself 
with their original admiration, both by the father and the son, though with the 
former it was now mingled with anger, and with the latter no longer gilded with 
hope. Yet the complaints against her, which, upon his arrival, Mr. Westwyn 
meant to make, were soon not merely relinquished, but transformed into pity, 
upon the view of her dejected countenance, and silent melancholy.

The Baronet, however, revived again, by seeing his old friend, whose humour so 
much resembled his own, that, in Yorkshire, he had been always his first 
favourite. Each the children of untutored nature, honest and open alike in 
their words and their dealings, their characters and their propensities were 
nearly the same, though Sir Hugh, more self-formed, had a language and manner 
of his own; and Mr. Westwyn, of a temper less equal and less gentle, gave way, 
as they arose, to such angry passions as the indulgent Baronet never felt.

'My dear friend,' said Mr. Westwyn, 'you don't take much notice of my Hal, 
though, I'll give you my word, you won't see such another young fellow every 
day. However, it's as well not, before his face, for it might only make him 
think himself somebody: and that, while I am alive, I don't intend he should 
do. I can't bear a young fellow not dutiful. I've always a bad opinion of him. 
I can't say he pleases me.'

'My dear Westwyn,' answered the Baronet, 'I've no doubt but what master Hal is 
very good, for which I am truly glad. But as to much over-rejoicing, now, upon 
the score of young boys, it's what I can't do, seeing they've turned out so 
ill, one after another, as far as I have had to do with them; for which, 
however, I hope I bear 'em no malice. They've enough to answer for without 
that, which, I hope, they'll think of in time.'

'Why to be sure, Sir Hugh, if you set about thinking of a young fellow by the 
pattern of my friend Clermont, I can't say I'm much surprised you don't care to 
give him a good word; I can't say I am. I am pretty much of the same way of 
thinking. I love to speak the truth.' He then took Mr. Tyrold apart, and ran on 
with a history of all he had gathered, while at Leipsic, of the conduct and way 
of life of Clermont Lynmere. 'He was a disgrace,' said he, 'even to the English 
name, as a Professor told me, that I can't remember the name of, it's so 
prodigious long; but, if it had not been for my son, he told me, they'd have 
thought all the English young fellows good for nothing, except extravagance, 
and eating and drinking! "They'd all round have got an ill name," says he, "if 
it had not been for your son," were his words which I shall never forget. I 
sent him over a noble pipe of Madeira, which I'd just got for myself, as soon 
as I came home. I took to him very much, I can't say but I did; he was a very 
good man; he had prodigiously the look of an Englishman. He said Hal was an 
ornament to the university. I took it very well of him. I wish he had not such 
a hard name. I can never call it to mind. I hate a hard name. I can never speak 
it without a blunder.'

Sir Hugh now, who had been talking with Henry, called upon Mr. Westwyn, to beg 
his pardon for not speaking of him more respectfully, saying: 'I see he's quite 
agreeable, which I should have noticed from the first, only being what I did 
not know; which I hope is my excuse; my head, my dear friend, not getting on 
much, in point of quickness: though I can't say it's for want of pains, since 
you and I used to live so much together; but to no great end, for I always find 
myself in the back, however it happens: which your son, Master Hal, is, I see, 
quite the contrary.'

Mr. Westwyn was so much gratified by this praise, that he immediately confessed 
the scheme and wish he had formed of marrying Hal to Camilla, only for her not 
approving it. Sir Hugh protested nothing could give him more pleasure than such 
a connexion, and significantly added, he had other nieces, besides Camilla.

'Why, yes,' said Mr. Westwyn, 'and I can't keep from looking at 'em; I like 'em 
all mightily. I'm a great friend to taking from a good stock. I chuse to know 
what I'm about. That girl at Southampton hit my fancy prodigiously. But I'm not 
for the beauty. A beauty won't make a good wife. It takes her too much time to 
put her cap on. That little one, there, with the hump, which I don't mind, nor 
the limp, neither, I like vastly. But I'm afraid Hal won't take to her. A young 
man don't much fancy an ugly girl. He's always hankering after something 
pretty. There's that other indeed, Miss Lavinia, is as handsome a girl as I'd 
wish to see. And she seems as good, too. However, I'm not for judging all by 
the eye. I'm past that. An old man should not play the fool. Which I wish 
somebody would whisper to a certain Lord that I know of, that don't behave 
quite to my mind. I'm not fond of an old fool: nor a young one neither. They 
make me sick.'

Sir Hugh heard and agreed to all this, with the same simplicity with which it 
was spoken; and, soon after, Yorkshire becoming their theme, Mr. Tyrold had the 
pleasure of seeing his brother so much re-animated by the revival of old 
scenes, ideas, and connexions, that he heartily joined in pressing the Mr. 
Westwyns to spend a fortnight at Cleves, to which they consented with pleasure.
