
A Surprise

Camilla strove to check her grief upon entering the carriage, in which Miss 
Margland had again the charge of the young party; but the interrogatory of her 
Father, Why will you leave me? was mentally repeated without ceasing. Ah! why, 
indeed! thought she, at a moment when every filial duty called more than ever 
for my stay!—Well, might he not divine the unnatural reason! can I believe it 
myself?—Believe such an hour arrived?—when my Mother—the best of 
Mothers!—is expected—when she returns to her family, Camilla seeks another 
abode! is not this a dream? and may I not one day awake from it?

Miss Margland was in the highest good humour at this expedition: and Indiana 
was still enraptured to visit London, from old expectations which she knew not 
how to relinquish; though they were fixed to no point, and as fantastic as 
vague. Eugenia, whose dejection had made Sir Hugh press her into the party, 
found nothing in it to revive her; and Camilla entered Grosvenor-square with 
keen dissatisfaction of every sort. The cautions of Edgar against Mrs. 
Berlinton broke into all the little relief she might have experienced upon 
again seeing her. She had meant to keep his final exhortations constantly in 
her mind, and to make all his opinions and counsels the rule and measure of her 
conduct: but a cruel perversity of events seemed to cast her every action into 
an apparent defiance of his wishes.

Mrs. Berlinton, who, in a mansion the most splendid, received her with the same 
gentle sweetness she had first sought her regard, was delighted by the 
unexpected sight of Eugenia, whose visit had been settled too late to be 
announced by letter; and caressed Indiana immediately as a sister. Miss 
Margland, who came but for two days, sought with much adulation to obtain an 
invitation for a longer stay; but Mrs. Berlinton, though all courtesy and 
grace, incommoded herself with no society that she did not find pleasing.

Melmond, who had accompanied them on horseback, was eager to engage the 
kindness of his sister for Indiana; and Mrs. Berlinton, in compliment to her 
arrival, refused all parties for the evening, and bestowed upon her an almost 
undivided attention.

This was not quite so pleasant to him in proof as in hope. Passionless, in this 
case, herself, the delusions of beauty deceived not her understanding; and half 
an hour sufficed to shew Indiana to be frivolous, uncultivated, and unmeaning. 
The perfection, nevertheless, of her face and person, obviated either wonder or 
censure of the choice of her brother; though she could not but regret that he 
had not seen with mental eyes the truly superior Eugenia.

The wretched Camilla quitted them all as soon as possible, to retire to her 
chamber, and ruminate upon her purposed letter. She meant, at first, to write 
in detail; but her difficulties accumulated as she weighed them. 'What a 
season,' cried she, 'to sink Lionel still deeper in disgrace! What a treachery, 
after voluntarily assisting him, to complain of, and betray him! ah! let my own 
faults teach me mercy for the faults of others!' yet, without this 
acknowledgment, what exculpation could she offer for the origin of her debts? 
and all she had incurred at Tunbridge? those of Southampton she now thought 
every way unpardonable. Even were she to relate the vain hopes which had led to 
the expence of the ball dress, could she plead, to an understanding like that 
of her Mother, that she had been deceived and played upon by such a woman as 
Mrs. Mittin? 'I am astonished now myself,' she cried, 'at that passive 
facility!—but to me, alas, thought comes only with repentance!' The Higden 
debt, both for the rent and the stores, was the only one at which she did not 
blush, since, great as was her indiscretion, in not enquiring into her powers 
before she plighted her services, it would be palliated by her motive.

Vainly she took up her pen; not even a line could she write. 'How enervating,' 
she cried, 'is all wrong! I have been, till now, a happy stranger to fear! 
Partially favoured, and fondly confiding, I have looked at my dear Father, I 
have met my beloved Mother, with the same courage, and the same pleasure that I 
looked at and met my brother and my sisters, and only with more reverence. How 
miserable a change! I shudder now at the presence of the most indulgent of 
Fathers! I fly with guilty cowardice from the fondest of Mothers!'

Eugenia, when able, followed her; and had no sooner heard the whole history, 
than, tenderly embracing her, she said, 'Let not this distress seem so 
desperate to you, my dearest sister! your own account points out to me how to 
relieve it, without either betraying our poor Lionel, or further weighing down 
our already heavily burthened friends.'

'And how, my dear Eugenia?' cried Camilla, with fearful gratitude, and 
involuntarily reviving by the most distant idea of such a project.

By adopting, she said, the same means that had been invented by Mrs. Mittin. 
She had many valuable trinkets, the annual offerings of her munificent uncle, 
the sale of which would go far enough, she could not doubt, towards the payment 
of the principal, to induce the money-lender to accept interest for the rest, 
till the general affairs of their house were re-established; when what remained 
of the sum could be discharged, without difficulty, by herself; now no longer 
wanting money, nor capable of receiving any pleasure from it, but by the 
pleasure she might give.

Camilla pressed her in her arms, almost kneeling with fond acknowledgments, and 
accepted, without hesitation, her generous offer.

'All, then, is arranged,' said Eugenia, with a smile so benign it seemed nearly 
beautiful; 'and to friendship, and each other, we will devote our future days. 
My spirits will revive in the revival of Camilla. To see her again gay will be 
renovation to my uncle; and who knows, my dear sister, but our whole family may 
again be blest, 'ere long, with peace?'

The next morning they sent off a note to the money-lender, whose direction 
Camilla had received from Mrs. Mittin, entreating his patience for a fortnight, 
or three weeks, when he would receive the greatest part of his money, with 
every species of acknowledgment.

Camilla, much relieved, went to sit with Mrs. Berlinton, but on entering the 
dressing room, was struck by the sight of Bellamy, just quitting it.

Mrs. Berlinton, upon her appearance, with a look of soft rapture approaching 
her, said: 'Felicitate me, loveliest Camilla!—my friend, my chosen friend is 
restored to me, and the society for which so long I have sighed in vain, may be 
once more mine!'

Camilla, startled, exclaimed with earnestness, 'My dearest Mrs. Berlinton, 
pardon me, I entreat—but is Mr. Bellamy known to Mr. Berlinton?'

'No!' answered she, disdainfully; 'but he has been seen by him. Mr. Berlinton 
is a stranger to merit or taste; and Alphonso, to him, is but as any other man.'

'They are, however, acquainted with each other?' said Camilla.

Mrs. Berlinton answered, that, after her marriage, she remained three months in 
Wales with her aunt, where Bellamy was travelling to view the country, and 
where, almost immediately after that unhappy enthralment, she first knew him, 
and first learnt the soothing charms of friendship; but from that period they 
had met no more, though they had constantly corresponded.

Camilla was now first sensible to all the alarm with which Edgar had hitherto 
striven to impress her in vain. The impropriety of such a connexion, the danger 
of such a partiality, filled her with wonder and disturbance. She hesitated 
whether to relate or not the adventure of Bellamy with her sister; but the 
strong repugnance of Eugenia to having it named, and the impossibility of 
proving the truth of the general opinion of his base scheme, decided her to 
silence. Upon the plans and the sentiments, however, of Mrs. Berlinton herself, 
she spared not the extremest sincerity; but she gained no ground by the 
contest, though she lost not any kindness by the attempt.

At dinner, she felt extremely disturbed by the re-appearance of Bellamy, [who] 
alone, she found, had been excepted by Mrs. Berlinton, in the orders of general 
denial to company. He seemed, himself, much struck at the sight of Eugenia, who 
blushed and looked embarrassed by his presence. He did not, however, address 
her; he confined his attentions to Mrs. Berlinton, or Miss Margland.

The former received them with distinguishing softness; the latter, at first, 
disdainfully repelled them, from the general belief at Cleves of his attempted 
elopement with Eugenia; but afterwards, finding she was left wholly to a person 
who had no resources for entertaining her, namely, herself,—and knowing 
Eugenia safe while immediately under her eye, she deigned to treat him with 
more consideration.

The opera was proposed for the evening, Mrs. Berlinton, having both tickets and 
her box at the service of her fair friends, as the lady with whom she had 
subscribed was out of town. Indiana was enchanted, Miss Margland was elevated, 
and Eugenia not unwilling to seek some recreation, though hopeless of finding 
it. But Camilla, notwithstanding she was lightened, at this moment, from one of 
her most corrosive cares, was too entirely miserable for any species of 
amusement. The same strong feelings that gave to pleasure, when she was happy, 
so high a zest, rendered it nearly abhorrent to her, when grief had possession 
of her mind.

After dinner, when the ladies retired to dress, Camilla, with some uneasiness, 
conjured Eugenia to avoid renewing any acquaintance with Bellamy.

Eugenia blushing, while a tear started into either eye, said she was but too 
well guarded from Bellamy, through a late transaction; which had exalted her to 
a summit of happiness, from which she could never now descend to any new plan 
of life, beyond the single state and retirement.

At night, the whole party went to the Opera, except Camilla, who, in spending 
the evening alone, meant to ruminate upon her affairs, and arrange her future 
conduct: but Edgar, his virtues, and his loss, took imperious possession of all 
her thoughts; and while she dwelt upon his honour, his sincerity, and his 
goodness, and traced, with cherished recollection, every scene in which she had 
been engaged with him, he and they recurred to her as visions of all earthly 
felicity.

Awakened from these reveries, by the sound of the carriage, and the rapping at 
the street door, she was hastening down stairs to meet her sister, when she 
heard Melmond call out from the coach: 'Is Miss Eugenia Tyrold come home?'

'No;' the man answered; and Melmond exclaimed; 'Good Heaven!—I must run then 
back to the theatre. Do not be alarmed, my Indiana, and do not alarm Miss 
Camilla, for I will not return without her.'

They all entered but himself; while Camilla, fixed to the stair upon which she 
had heard these words, remained some minutes motionless. Then, tottering down 
to the parlour, with a voice hollow from affright, and a face pale as death, 
she tremulously articulated, 'where is my sister?'

They looked all aghast, and not one of them, for some time, was capable to give 
any account that was intelligible. She then gathered that, in coming out of the 
theatre, to get to the coach, they had missed her. None of them knew how, which 
way, in what manner.

'And where's Mr. Bellamy?' cried she, in an agony of apprehension; 'was he at 
the Opera? where—where is he?'

Miss Margland looked dismayed, and Mrs. Berlinton amazed, at this 
interrogatory; but they both said he had only been in the box at the beginning 
of the Opera, and afterwards to help them out of the crowd.

'And who did he help? who? who?' exclaimed Camilla.

'Me,—first—' answered Miss Margland,—'and, when we got into a great 
crowd, he took care of Miss Eugenia too.' She then added, that in this crowd, 
both she and Eugenia had been separated from Mrs. Berlinton and Indiana, who by 
Melmond and another gentleman had been handed straight to the carriage, without 
difficulty; that soon after, she had lost the arm of Bellamy, who, by some 
mistake, had turned a wrong way; but she got to the coach by herself; where 
they had waited full half an hour, Melmond running to and fro and searching in 
every direction, but in vain, to find Eugenia. Nor had Bellamy again appeared. 
They then came home, hoping he had put her into a chair, and that she might be 
arrived before them.

'Dreadful! dreadful!' cried Camilla, sinking on the floor, 'she is forced away! 
she is lost!'

When again her strength returned, she desired that some one might go 
immediately to the house or lodgings of Bellamy, to enquire if he were come 
home.

This was done by a footman, who brought word he had not been seen there since 
six o'clock in the evening, when he dressed, and went out.

Camilla now, confirmed in her horrible surmise, was nearly frantic. She 
bewailed her sister, her father, her uncle; she wanted herself to rush forth, 
to search Eugenia in the streets; she could scarce be detained within, scarce 
kept off from entire delirium.
