
Hints upon National Prejudice

With mingled disquietude and distaste, Melmond saw the reluctance of Indiana to 
quit town, and that he was less than a cypher with her upon the last evening's 
assembly, where, without deigning to bestow one look upon him, she chatted, 
smiled, and fluttered with every one else; undisguisedly betraying that [he] 
whom she should soon have alone, and have always, should not rob of even one 
precious moment this last splendid blaze of general admiration. He sighed; and 
in common with the hapless perverseness of mortals, thought he had thrown away, 
in Eugenia, a gem richer than all her tribe![5]

Camilla, whose heart, however dead to joy, was invariably open to tenderness, 
was melted with fond emotions in the idea of again meeting her beloved Eugenia, 
and ready for her journey nearly with the light.

Soon after she was dressed, a house maid, tapping at her door, said, 'Pray, 
Ma'am, is Miss Lynmere with you?'

'No.'

Presently Miss Margland came herself.

'Pray, Miss Camilla, do you know any thing of Miss Lynmere? It's the oddest 
thing in the world where she can be!'

Camilla, now, went forth to aid the search; Melmond, who was waiting to hand 
her into the carriage, looked amazed at the enquiry. It soon, however, was 
clear, that she was no where in the house; and, after sundry examinations and 
researches, one of the maids was brought to confess having aided her, in the 
middle of the night, to go into the street, where she was handed into a post 
chaise by Mr. Macdersey.

Melmond appeared thunder struck. An action so unexpected at the period of a 
solemn engagement which waited but the journey to Cleves for being compleated, 
seemed to him, at first, incredible. But, when Miss Margland exclaimed 'O 
pursue her; Mr. Melmond! order your horse, and gallop to Scotland immediately!' 
he gravely, and rather drily answered: 'By no means, Ma'am! The man who has the 
honour of her preference, is the only one who can have any hope to make her 
happy. I have no ambition for a hand that has been voluntarily held out to 
another.'

He then returned, quietly, to his own lodgings; far more indignant than hurt at 
this abrupt conclusion of a connexion which, though it had opened to him as a 
promise of Elysium, was closing with every menace of mutual discontent.

Camilla was truly concerned; and not merely for the future risk run by her 
Cousin, in this rash flight, but for the new disappointment to her Uncle. She 
was obliged, however, to bestow her whole attention upon Miss Margland, whose 
tribulation was yet greater, and who, in losing thus her pupil, lost the 
expected reward of near thirteen years of unwilling attendance. She had, by no 
means, indeed, merited this treachery from Indiana, whom though incapable to 
instruct in much good, she had sedulously guarded from all evil.

To return to Sir Hugh without her charge, without indeed either of the young 
ladies who were put under her care, she had not courage. Nor could Camilla so 
little feel for her distress as to request it. An express, therefore, was 
ordered to Cleves, for informing him of these ill tidings, with a very 
elaborate panegyric from Miss Margland of her own conduct; and a desire to know 
if she should remain in town till something transpired concerning Indiana.

The express was but just gone, when a packet, which ought to have arrived two 
days before, by the stage, was delivered to Camilla. Its intention was merely 
to convey more speedily a letter from Lavinia, containing the terrible 
information that Mr. Clykes had just been at Etherington himself, to deliver in 
his accounts, and press immediate payment! Their Father, Lavinia said, 
conceived the whole some imposition, till the man produced the paper signed by 
his daughter. She had then been called in, and obliged to confess her knowledge 
of the transaction. She would avoid, she said, particulars that could be only 
uselessly afflicting; but the interview had ended in their Father's agreeing to 
pay, when it should be possible, the sums actually delivered to the creditors, 
and for which Mr. Clykes could produce their own receipts; but refusing, 
positively and absolutely, any gratuity whatsoever, from detestation of so 
dangerous and seductive a species of trade, as clandestine and illegal 
money-lending to minors: The man, much provoked, said a friend of his had been 
used far more handsomely by Sir Hugh Tyrold; but finding his remonstrances 
vain, acknowledged the law against him for the interest; but threatened to send 
in an account for his own trouble, in collecting and paying the bills, that he 
would dispute, for validity, in any court of justice to which he could be 
summoned: and, in leaving the house, he menaced an immediate writ, if all he 
could legally claim were not paid the next day; unless a new bond were properly 
signed, with a promise to abide by that already drawn up. Their Father, she was 
forced to confess, had now lent his every guinea, for the debts of Clermont, to 
Sir Hugh; and was at this instant, deliberating to whom he should apply; but 
desired, meanwhile, an exact statement of the debts which this man had in 
commission to discharge. The letter concluded with Lavinia's unfeigned grief in 
the task of writing it.

Camilla read it with a distraction that made it wholly unintelligible to her; 
yet could not read it a second time; her eyes became dim, her faculties 
confused, and she rather felt deprived of the power of thinking, than filled 
with any new and dreadful subjects for rumination.

In this state, the letter on the floor, her eyes staring around, yet looking 
vacant, and searching nothing she was called to Lord O'Lerney, who begged the 
honour of a conference with her upon business.

She shook her head, in token of denial, but could not speak. The servant looked 
amazed; yet brought her a second message, that his Lordship was extremely sorry 
to torment her, but wished to communicate something concerning Mr. Macdersey.

She then faintly articulated, 'I can see nobody.'

Still the same dreadful vacuity superseded her sensibility, till, soon after, 
she received a note from Lady Isabella Irby, desiring to be admitted to a short 
conversation with her upon the part of Lord O'Lerney.

With the name of Lady Isabella Irby recurred the remembrance that she was a 
favourite of Edgar—and bursting into tears, she consented to the interview; 
which took place immediately.

The terrible state in which she appeared was naturally, though not justly, 
attributed by her ladyship to the elopement of her Cousin: while Camilla, 
called by her sight to softer regrets, beheld again, in mental view, the loved 
and gentle image of Edgar.

Lady Isabella apologised politely, but briefly, for her intrusion, saying: 'My 
Lord O'Lerney, whose judgment is never in any danger, but where warped by his 
wish of giving pleasure, insists upon it that you will be less incommoded by a 
quick forced admission of me than of himself. Nobody else will think so: but it 
is not easy to refuse him: so here I am. The motive of this intrusion you can 
but too readily divine. Lord O'Lerney is truly concerned at this rash action in 
his kinsman, which he learnt by an accidental call at his lodgings, where 
various circumstances had just made it known. He could not rest without 
desiring to see some part of the young lady's family, and making an offer of 
his own best services with respect to some arrangement for her future 
establishment. It is for this purpose, you have been so importunately hurried; 
Lord O'Lerney wishing to make the first news that is sent to Sir Hugh Tyrold 
less alarming, by stating, at once, what he can communicate concerning Mr. 
Macdersey.'

Camilla, who only now recollected that Mr. Macdersey was related to Lord 
O'Lerney, was softened into some attention, and much gratitude for his 
goodness, and for her Ladyship's benevolence in being its messenger.

'Will you, then,' said Lady Isabella, 'now you understand the purport of his 
visit, see Lord O'Lerney himself? He can give you much better and clearer 
documents than I can; and it is always the best and shortest mode to deal with 
principals.'

Camilla mechanically complied, and Lady Isabella sent her footman with a note 
to his Lordship, who was waiting at her house in Park-lane.

The discourse still fell wholly upon Lady Isabella; Camilla, lost alternately 
in misery and absence, spoke not, heard not; yet former scenes, though not 
present circumstances, were brought to her mind by the object before her, and 
almost with reverence, she looked at the favourite of Edgar, in whose sweetness 
of countenance, good sense, delicacy, and propriety, she conceived herself 
reading every moment the causes of his approbation. Ah, why, thought she, while 
unable to reply, or to listen to what was said, why knew I not this charming 
woman, while yet he took an interest in my conduct and connexions! Perhaps her 
gentle wisdom might have drawn me into its own path! how would he have 
delighted to have seen me under such influence! how now, even now,—lost to 
him as I am!—would he generously rejoice, could he view the condescending 
partiality of looks and manner that seem to denote her disposition to kindness!

Lord O'Lerney soon joined them; and after thanking Camilla for granting, and 
his Ambassadress for obtaining him an audience, said; 'I have been eager for 
the honour of a conference with Miss Tyrold, in the hope of somewhat 
alleviating the fears for the future, that may naturally join with displeasure 
for the present, from the very unadvised step of this morning. But, however 
wrong the manner in which this marriage may be effected, the alliance in itself 
will not, I hope, be so disadvantageous, as matches of this expeditious 
character prove in general. The actual possessions of Macdersey are, indeed, 
far beneath what Miss Lynmere, with her uncommon claims, might demand; but his 
expectations are considerable, and well founded; and his family will all come 
forward to meet her, with every mark of respect, for which, as its head, I 
shall lead the way. He is honest, honourable, and good natured; not 
particularly endowed, with judgment or discretion, but by no means wanting in 
parts, though they are rather wild and eccentric.'

His Lordship then gave a full and satisfactory detail of the present state, and 
future hopes of his kinsman; and added, that it should be his own immediate 
care to endeavour to secure for the fair bride a fixed settlement, from the 
rich old cousin who had long promised to make Macdersey his heir. He told 
Camilla to write this, without delay, to the young lady's Uncle, with full 
leave to use his name and authority.

'At all times,' he continued, 'it is necessary to be quick, and as explicit as 
possible, in representing what can conciliate an adventure of this sort, of 
which the clandestine measure implies on one side, if not on both, something 
wrong; but most especially it is necessary to use speed where the flight is 
made with an Hibernian; for with the English in general, it is nearly enough 
that a man should be born in Ireland, to decide him for a fortune-hunter. If 
you lived, however, in that country, you would see the matter pretty equally 
arranged; and that there are not more of our pennyless beaux who return laden 
with the commodity of rich wives, than of those better circumstanced who bring 
home wives with more estimable dowries.'

He then added, that it was from Miss Lynmere herself he had learnt the 
residence of Camilla in Grosvenor Square; for, having made some acquaintance 
with her at one of Mrs. Berlinton's evening parties, he had heard she was a 
niece of Sir Hugh Tyrold, and immediately enquired after her fair kinswoman, 
whom he had seen at Tunbridge.

Camilla thanked him for remembering her; and Lady Isabella, with a countenance 
that implied approbation in the remark, said; 'I have never once heard of Miss 
Tyrold at the assemblies of this house.'

She quietly replied she had never been present at them; but a look of 
sensibility with which her eyes dropt, spoke more than she intended, of concern 
at their existence, or at least frequency.

'Your lovely young Hostess,' said Lord O'Lerney, 'has entered the world at too 
early an hour to be aware of the surfeit she is preparing herself, by this 
unremitting luxury of pleasure; but I know so well her innocence and good 
qualities, that I doubt not but the error will bring its own cure, and she will 
gladly return to the literary and elegant intercourse, which she has just now 
given up for one so much more tumultuous.'

'I am glad you still think so, my Lord;' said Lady Isabella, also looking down; 
'she is a very sweet creature, and the little I have seen of her, made me, 
while in her sight, warmly her well-wisher. Nevertheless I should rather see 
any young person, for whom I was much interested,—unless endowed with the 
very remarkable forbearance of Miss Tyrold,—under her influence after the 
period your Lordship expects to return, than during its interregnum!'

Camilla disavowed all claim to such praise, blushing both for her friend and 
herself at what was said. Lord O'Lerney, looking concerned, paused, and then 
answered, 'You know my partiality for Mrs. Berlinton: yet I always see with 
fresh respect the courage with which my dear Lady Isabella casts aside her 
native reserve and timidity, where she thinks a hint—an intimation—may do 
good, or avert dangers.'

His eye was then fixed upon Camilla, who surprized, turned hastily to Lady 
Isabella, and saw a tender compassion in her countenance, that confirmed the 
interpretation of Lord O'Lerney; joined with a modest confusion that seemed 
afraid, or ashamed, of what had escaped her.

Grateful for herself, but extremely grieved for the idea that seemed to have 
gone forth of Mrs. Berlinton, she felt a tear start into her eye. She chaced 
it, with as little emotion as she could shew; and Lord O'Lerney, with an air of 
gayer kindness, said; 'As we must now, Miss Tyrold, account ourselves to be 
somewhat allied, you permit me, I hope, to recommend my gallant Cousin to your 
protection with Sir Hugh? That he has his share of the wildness, the blunders, 
the eccentricities, and the rhodomontade, which form, with you English, our 
stationary national character, must not be denied; but he has also, what may 
equally, I hope, be given us in the lump, generosity, spirit, and good 
intentions. With all this....'

He was here interrupted; the door being suddenly burst open by Mrs. Mittin, who 
entered, exclaiming, 'Lord, Miss, what a sad thing this is! I declare it's put 
me quite into a quiver! And all Winchester's quite in an uproar, as one may 
say. You never see how every body's in a turmoil!'

Here ended the little interval of horrour in Camilla. Mrs. Mittin and Mr. 
Clykes seemed to her as one; yet that, already, her Cousin's elopement should 
have spread so near home, seemed impossible. 'When,' she cried, 'were you in 
Winchester? And how came this affair known to you?'

'Known? why, my dear Miss, it was there it all happened. I come through it with 
Mr. Dennel, who was so obliging as to bring me to town, for a little business 
I've got to do; and next week he'll take me back again; for as to poor little 
Mrs. Lissin, she'll be quite lost without me. She don't know her right hand 
from her left, as one may say. But how should she, poor child? Why she is but a 
baby. What's fifteen? And she's no more.'

'We'll talk of that,' said Camilla, colouring at her loquacious familiarity, 
'some other time.' And attempted to beg Lord O'Lerney would finish what he was 
saying. But Mrs. Mittin, somewhat affronted, cried; 'Lord, only think of your 
sitting here, talking, and making yourself so comfortable, just as if nothing 
was the matter! when every body else is in such a taking as never was the like! 
I must say, as to that, a gentleman more liked, and in more respect never was, 
I believe; and I can't say but what I'm very sorry myself for what Mr. Clykes 
has done; however, I told you, you know, you'd best not provoke him; for though 
there can't be a better sort of man, he'll leave no stone unturned to get his 
money.'

'For Heaven's sake,' cried Camilla, startled, 'what....'

'What?... Why, Lord, Miss! don't you know your Papa's took up? He's put in 
Winchester Prison, for that debt, you know.'

The breath of Camilla instantly stopt, and senseless, lifeless, she sunk upon 
the floor.

Lord O'Lerney quitted the room in great concern, to call some female 
assistants; but Lady Isabella remained, contributing with equal tenderness and 
judgment to her aid, though much personally affected by the incident.

Her recovery was quick, but it was only to despair; to screams rather than 
lamentations, to cries rather than tears. Her reason felt the shock as forcibly 
as her heart; the one seemed tottering on its seat, the other bursting its 
abode. Words of alarming incoherency proclaimed the danger menacing her 
intellects, while agonies nearly convulsive distorted her features, and writhed 
her form.

Unaffectedly shocked, yet not venturing, upon so slight an acquaintance, to 
interfere, Lady Isabella uttered gently but impressively her good wishes and 
concern, and glided away.

The nearly distracted Camilla saw not that she went; and knew no longer that 
she had been in the room. She held her forehead one moment; called for death 
the next; and the next wildly deprecated eternal punishment. But as the horrour 
nearly intolerable of this first abrupt blow gave way, the desire of flying 
instantly to her Father was the symptom of restored recollection.

Hastening then to Miss Margland, she conjured her, by all that was most 
affecting, to set off immediately for Winchester. But Miss Margland, though she 
spared not the most severe attacks upon the already self-condemned and nearly 
demolished Camilla, always found something relative to herself that was more 
pressing than what could regard any other, and declared she could not stir from 
town till she received an answer from Sir Hugh.

Camilla besought at least to have the carriage; but of this she asserted 
herself at present the indisputable mistress, and as the express might come 
back in a few hours, with directions that she should set off immediately, she 
would not listen to parting with it. Camilla, frantic to be gone, flew then 
down stairs, and called to the porter in the hall, that some one should 
instantly seek her a chaise, coach, or any conveyance whatever, that could 
carry her to Winchester.

She perceived not that Lady Isabella, waiting for her footman, who had, 
accidentally, gone on further, upon some message, now opened the door of the 
parlour, where Lord O'Lerney was conversing with her upon what had happened; 
she was flying back, though not knowing whither nor which way she turned, when 
Lord O'Lerney, gently stopping her, asked, why she would not, on such an 
emergence, apply for the carriage of Mrs. Berlinton? Lady Isabella seconded the 
motion, by a soft, but just hint, of the danger of her taking such a journey, 
in a hired carriage, entirely unprotected.

She had scarce consideration enough left to either thank or understand them, 
yet mechanically followed their counsel, and went to Mrs. Berlinton; Lord 
O'Lerney, deeply touched by her distress, sending in a servant at the same time 
with his name, and following: while Lady Isabella, too much interested to go 
till something was decided, quietly shut herself into the parlour, there to 
wait his Lordship's information.

The request for the carriage was, indeed, rather made by him than by Camilla, 
who, when she entered the room, and would have spoken, found herself deprived 
of the power of utterance, and looked a picture of speechless dismay.

The tender feelings of Mrs. Berlinton were all immediately awakened by this 
sight, and she eagerly answered Lord O'Lerney, that both her carriage and 
herself should be devoted to her distressed friend: yet, the first emotion 
over, she recollected an engagement she could not break, though one she 
hesitated to mention, and at last only alluded to unexplained, though making 
known it was insurmountable; while the colour, of which her late hours had 
robbed her lovely cheeks, returned to them as she stammered her retractation.

The next day, however, she was beginning to promise,—but Camilla, to whom the 
next minute seemed endless, flew down again to the hall, to supplicate the 
first footman she could meet, to run and order any sort of carriage he could 
find; with but barely sufficient recollection to refrain running out with that 
view herself.

Lady Isabella, again coming forth, entreated to know if there were any 
commission, any possible service she could herself perform. Camilla thanked 
her, without knowing what she said; and Lord O'Lerney, who was descending the 
stairs, repeated similar offers. But wild with affright, or shuddering with 
horrour, she passed without hearing or observing him.

To see a young creature in a state so deplorable, and to consider her as 
travelling without any friend or support, in so shaken a condition, to visit an 
imprisoned Father, touched these benign observers with the sincerest 
commiseration; and the connexion of a part of his family forming at this moment 
with a branch of her own, induced Lord O'Lerney to believe he was almost bound 
to take care of her himself. 'And yet,' said he to Lady Isabella, 'though I am 
old enough to be her grandfather, the world, should I travel with her, might 
impute my assistance to a species of admiration which I hope to experience no 
more—as witness my trusting myself so much with Lady Isabella Irby!'

Lady Isabella, from the quick coincidence of similar feelings, instantly 
conceived his wishes, and paused to weigh their possibility. A short 
consideration was sufficient for this purpose. It brought to her memory her 
various engagements; but it represented at the same time to her benevolence 
that they would be all, by the performance of one good action,

More honour'd in the breach than the observance:
She sent, therefore, a message after Camilla, entreating a short conference.

Camilla, who was trying to comprehend some further account from Mrs. Mittin, 
silently, but hastily obeyed the call; and her look of wild anguish would have 
fixed the benign intention of Lady Isabella, had it been wavering. In a simple 
phrase, but with a manner the most delicate, her Ladyship then offered to 
conduct her to Winchester. A service so unexpected, a goodness so consoling, 
instantly brought Camilla to the use of her frightened away faculties, but with 
sensations of gratitude so forcible, that Lord O'Lerney with difficulty saved 
her from falling at the feet of his amiable friend, and with yet more 
difficulty restrained his own knees from doing her that homage. And still the 
more strongly he felt this active exertion, from the disappointment he had just 
endured through the failure of his favourite Mrs. Berlinton.

No time was to be lost; Lady Isabella determined to do well what she once 
undertook to do at all; she went to Park-lane, to make known her excursion, and 
arrange some affairs, and then instantly returned, in her own post-chaise, and 
four horses, for Camilla; who was driven from the metropolis.
