
The Operation of Terror

Lady Isabella, for the first two or three miles, left Camilla uninterruptedly 
to her own thoughts; she then endeavoured to engage her in some discourse, but 
was soon forced to desist. Her misery exceeded all measure of restraint, all 
power of effort. Her Father in prison! and for her own debts! The picture was 
too horrible for her view, yet too adhesive to all her thoughts, all her 
feelings, all her faculties, to be removed from them a moment. Penetrated by 
what she owed to Lady Isabella, she frequently took her hand, pressed it 
between her own, pressed it to her lips; but could shew her no other gratitude, 
and force herself to no other exertion.

It was still early, they travelled post, and with four horses, and arrived at 
Winchester before eight o'clock.

Shaking, she entered the town, half fainting, half dead. Lady Isabella would 
have driven straight on to Etherington, which was but a stage further; but to 
enter the rectory, whence the Rector himself was torn—'No!' cried she, 'no! 
there where abides my Father, there alone will I abide! No roof shall cover my 
head, but that which covers his! I have no wish but to sink at his feet—to 
crawl in the dust—to confine myself to the hardest labour for the remnant of 
my miserable existence, so it might expiate but this guilty outrage!'

Lady Isabella took not any advantage of the anguish that was thus bursting 
forth with secret history; she was too delicate and too good to seize such a 
moment for surprising confidence, and only enquired if she had any friend in 
the town, who could direct her whither to go, and accompany as well as direct.

She knew no one with sufficient intimacy to endure presenting herself to them 
upon such an occasion; and preferred proceeding alone to the sad and cruel 
interview. Lady Isabella ordered the chaise to an hotel, where she was shewn 
into a room upstairs, whence she sent one of her own servants to enquire out 
where debtors were confined, and if Mr. Tyrold were in custody: charging him 
not to name, from whom or why he came, and begging Camilla to get ready a note 
to prepare her Father for the meeting, and prevent any affecting surprise. She 
then went to chuse herself a chamber, determined not to quit her voluntary 
charge, till she saw her in the hands of her own friends.

Camilla could not write: to kneel, to weep, to sue, was all she could bear to 
plan; to present to him the sight of her hand writing she had not courage.

Presently she heard a chaise drive rapidly through the inn gate: it might be 
him, perhaps released; she flew down the stairs with that wild hope; but no 
sooner had descended them, than a dread of his view took its place, and she ran 
back: she stopt, however, in the landing place, to hear who entered.

Suddenly a voice struck her ear that made her start; that vibrated quick to her 
heart, and there seemed to arrest the springs of life; she thought it the voice 
of her Mother——

It ceased to speak; and she dropt on one knee, inwardly, but fervently praying 
her senses might deceive her.

Again, however, and more distinctly, it reached her; doubt then ceased, and 
terrour next to horrour took its place. What was said she knew not, her 
trepidation was too great to take in more than the sound.

Prostrate she fell on the floor; but hearing a waiter say, 'Up stairs, madam, 
you may have a room to yourself.' She started, rose, and rushing violently back 
to the apartment she had quitted, bolted herself in; exclaiming, 'I am not 
worthy to see you, my Mother! I have cast my Father into prison—and I know 
you will abhor me!'

She then sat down against the door, to listen if she were pursued; she heard a 
footstep, a female step; she concluded it that of her Mother; 'She can come,' 
cried she, 'but to give me her malediction!' And flew frantic about the room, 
looking for any means of escape, yet perceiving only the window, whence she 
must be dashed to destruction.

She now heard a hand upon the lock of the door. 'O that I could die! that I 
could die!' she cried, madly advancing to the window, and throwing up the sash, 
yet with quick instinctive repentance pulling it down, shuddering and 
exclaiming: 'Is there no death for me but murder—no murder but suicide?'

A voice now found its way through her cries to her ear, that said, 'It is me, 
my dear Miss Tyrold; will you not admit me?'

It was Lady Isabella; but her Mother might be with her: she could not, however, 
refuse to open the door, though desperately she said to herself: If she is 
there, I will pass her, and rush into the streets!

Seeing, however, Lady Isabella alone, she dropt on her knees, ejaculating 
'Thank Heaven! thank Heaven! one moment yet I am spared!'

'What is it, my dear Miss Tyrold,' said Lady Isabella, 'that causes you this 
sudden agony? what can it be that thus dreadfully disorders you?'

'Is she with you?' cried she, in a voice scarce audible, 'does she follow me? 
does she demand my Father?'

'Rise, dear madam, and compose yourself. If you mean a Lady whom this minute I 
have passed, and whose countenance so much resembles yours, that I thought her 
at once some near relation, she is just gone from this house.'

'Thank Heaven! thank Heaven!' again ejaculated the prostrate Camilla; 'My 
Mother is spared a little longer the dreadful sight of all she must now most 
abominate upon earth!'

She then begged Lady Isabella instantly to order the chaise, and return to town.

'On the contrary,' answered her Ladyship, extremely surprised at so wild a 
request, 'Let me rather, myself, carry you to your family.'

'O no, Lady Isabella, no!' cried Camilla, speaking with frightful rapidity, and 
shaking in every limb, 'all now is changed. I came to wait upon my Father—to 
humble myself at his feet—not to obtrude myself upon my Mother!—O Lady 
Isabella!—I shall have broken her heart—and I dare not offend her with my 
sight!'

Lady Isabella, with the most judicious gentleness, endeavoured to render her 
more reasonable. 'I pretend not,' she said, 'to decide upon your situation, 
though I comprehend its general affliction: yet still, and at all events, its 
termination must be a meeting. Suffer me, therefore, rather to hasten than 
retard so right a measure. Allow of my mediation, and give me the infinite 
pleasure of leaving you in the hands of your friends.'

Camilla, though scarcely able to articulate her words, declared again the 
motive to her journey was at an end; that her Father had now one to watch, 
soothe, and attend him, who had none of her dreadful drawbacks to consoling 
powers; and that she would remain at Mrs. Berlinton's till summoned home by 
their immediate commands.

Lady Isabella began pleading their own rights to decide if or not the meeting 
should be deferred: but wildly interrupting her, 'You know not,' she cried, 
'what it is you ask. I have not nerves, I have not hardiness to force myself 
into such a presence. An injured Father ... an offended Mother ... O Lady 
Isabella! if you knew how I adore—and how I have ruined them!...'

'Let me go to them from you, myself; let me represent your situation. They are 
now probably together. That Lady whom I saw but from the stairs, though her 
countenance so much struck me, and whom I now conclude to be Mrs. Tyrold, said, 
as she passed, I shall walk; I only want a guide;'—

'They had not, then, even met!' cried Camilla, starting up with fresh horrour; 
'she is but just arrived—has but just been at Etherington—and there 
heard—that her husband was in prison—and in prison for the debts of her 
daughter! her guilty ... perhaps reprobated daughter!'—

Again, wringing her hands, half distracted, 'O, that the earth,' she cried, 
'had received me, ere I quitted the parental roof! Innocent I had then died, 
beloved, regretted,—no shame would have embittered my Father's sorrow—no 
wrath my Mother's—no culpable misconduct would have blighted with disgrace 
their so long—long wished-for meeting!'

The compassionating, yet judicious Lady Isabella, willing to shorten the 
sufferings she pitied, made yet another effort to prevent this unadvised 
return, by proposing they should both sleep this night at Winchester, that 
Camilla might gather some particulars of her family, and some composure for 
herself, to better judge what step to pursue. But all desire of meeting was now 
converted into horrour; she was too much known in the neighbourhood to escape 
being recognized if she stayed till the morning, and her shattered intellects, 
she declared, could not bear passing a whole night in expectation of a 
discovery through some accident. 'Have I not already,' cried she, 'heard her 
voice and fled its sound? Judge then, Lady Isabella, if I can present myself 
before her! No, I must write, first. I have a long and dreadful history to 
relate—and then, when she has heard it—and when the rectory has again its 
reverend master—and when they find some little palliation, where now they can 
see only guilt—and when all is committed without disguise to their 
goodness—their mercy—they may say to me perhaps themselves: Unhappy 
Camilla! thou hast paid thy just penalty; come home, then, to thy parents' 
roof, thou penitent child!'

Lady Isabella knew too little of the characters with which she had to deal, to 
judge if it would be right to insist any further: she ordered, therefore, fresh 
horses to her chaise, and as soon as her footman came back, who brought the now 
useless direction where Mr. Tyrold was to be found, they galloped out of 
Winchester.

At Alton they stopt to sleep; and, her immediate terrour removed, she became 
more sensible of what she owed to Lady Isabella, to whom, in the course of the 
evening, she recounted frankly the whole history of her debts, except what 
related to Lionel.

'Your Ladyship hears me,' said she, in conclusion, 'with the patience of 
benevolence, though I fear, with the censure of all judgment. What evils have 
accrued from want of consideration and foresight! My errours have all been 
doubled by concealment—every mischief has been augmented by delay. O, Lady 
Isabella! how sad an example shall I add to your powers of benign 
instruction!—From day to day, from hour to hour, I planned expedients, where 
I ought to have made confessions! To avoid one dreadful—but direct evil, what 
I have suffered has been nearly intolerable—what I have inflicted, 
unpardonable!'

Lady Isabella, much touched by her openness and confidence, repaid them by all 
that compassion could suggest, or that a sincere disposition towards esteem 
could anticipate of kindness. She gathered the amount of the sum for which Mr. 
Tyrold was confined, and besought Camilla to let it less weigh upon her 
spirits, as she could herself undertake that Lord O'Lerney would accommodate 
him with it immediately, and wait his perfect leisure for re-payment. 'I have 
known him,' said she, 'from a child, and have always seen, with respect and 
admiration, the prompt pleasure with which he rather seizes than accepts every 
opportunity to do good.'

Camilla returned the most grateful thanks; but acknowledged she had no 
apprehension but that the writ would immediately be withdrawn, as the county 
was almost filled with friends to her Father, who would come forward upon such 
an occasion. 'What rests thus upon my mind,' said she, 'and what upon his—and 
upon my Mother's will rest—is the disgrace—and the cause! the one so 
public, the other so clandestine! And besides, though this debt will be easily 
discharged, its payment by a loan is but incurring another: and how that is to 
be paid, I know not indeed. Alas! Lady Isabella!—the Father I have thus 
dreadfully involved, has hitherto, throughout his exemplary life, held it a 
sacred duty to adapt his expences to his income!'

Again Lady Isabella gave what consolation she could bestow; and in return for 
her trust, said she would speak to her with sincerity upon a point of much 
delicacy. It was of her friend, Mrs. Berlinton; 'who now,' said she, 'you are 
not, perhaps, aware, is become a general topic of discourse. To the platonics, 
with which she set out in life, she has, of late, joined coquetry; nor even 
there stops the ardour with which she seeks to animate her existence; to two 
characters, hitherto thought the most contradictory, the sentimental and the 
flirting, she unites yet a third, till now believed incompatible with the 
pleasures and pursuits of either; this, I need not tell you, is that of a 
gamestress. And when to three such attributes is added an open aversion to her 
husband, a professed, an even boasted hatred of his person, his name, his very 
being—what hope can be entertained, be her heart, her intentions what they 
may, that the various dangers she sets at defiance, will not ultimately take 
their revenge, and surprise her in their trammels?'

Edgar himself seemed, to Camilla, to be speaking in this representation; and 
that idea made it catch her attention, in the midst of her utmost misery. She 
urged, however, all she knew, and could suggest, in favour of Mrs. Berlinton; 
and Lady Isabella expressed much concern in occasioning her any painful 
sensations. 'But who,' said she, 'can see you thus nearly, and not be 
interested in your happiness? And I have known, alas!—though I am still under 
thirty, instances innumerable of self-deluded young women, who trusting to 
their own pure intentions, have neither feared nor heeded the dangers which 
encircled them, till imperceptibly, from the insidious influence of levity, 
they have pursued the very course they began with disclaiming, and followed the 
very steps from which at first they unaffectedly recoiled.'

Instructed and grateful, though incapable of being tranquillised, Camilla the 
next day reached Grosvenor Square long before her fair friend had left her 
downy pillow. Lady Isabella exacted a promise to be informed of her 
proceedings, and, loaded with merited acknowledgments, returned to her own 
mansion.

Camilla took possession of the first room in which she found a pen and ink, and 
wrote instantly to Lavinia a short, rapid, and incoherent letter, upon the 
distraction of her mind at the dreadful calamity she had occasioned her Father, 
and the accumulated horrours to which her Mother had returned. She durst not 
present herself before them uncalled, not even by letter; but she would live in 
the strictest retirement and penance till they ordered her home, for which 
epoch, not more longed [for] than dreaded, she besought her sister's mediation.

This sent off, she forced herself to wait upon Miss Margland, who had received 
an answer from Cleves to continue in town till Indiana wrote or re-appeared. 
She was put immediately into uncommon good-humour, by the ill success at the 
journey of Camilla, which she protested was exactly what she expected.

Camilla then strove to recollect all she had been told by Lord O'Lerney of Mr. 
Macdersey, and to relate it to Miss Margland, who, pleased and surprised, 
undertook to write it to Sir Hugh.

To three days of dreadful suspense she now saw herself inevitably condemned, in 
waiting an answer from Lavinia: but as her eyes were opened to remark, by the 
admonitions of Lady Isabella, and her attention was called back to the earlier 
cautions of Edgar, her time, though spent with misery, hung not upon her 
unoccupied. She thought herself called upon by every tie of friendship, 
faithfully and courageously to represent to Mrs. Berlinton her impropriety of 
conduct with regard to Bellamy, and the reports that were spread abroad to her 
more general disadvantage.

Her reception from that Lady, she had thought, for the first time, cold. She 
had welcomed her, indeed, with an accustomed embrace, but her kindness seemed 
strained, her smile was faint, and the eyes which so softly used to second it, 
were averted.

As soon as they were alone together, Camilla took her hand; but, without 
returning its pressure, Mrs. Berlinton presented her with a new poem for her 
evening's amusement.

Camilla put it down, but while hesitating how to begin, Bellamy was announced. 
She started, and flew away, but returned when he was gone, and begged a 
conference.

Mrs. Berlinton answered certainly; though she looked embarrassed, and added not 
immediately, as she was obliged to dress for the evening.

Camilla entreated she might speak with her before dinner the next day.

To this she received a gentle assent: but no interview at the time appointed 
took place; and when at dinner they met, no notice was taken of the neglect.

She now saw she was pointedly avoided. Her courage, however, was called upon, 
her gratitude was indebted for past kindnesses, and her honour felt a double 
engagement. The opportunity therefore she could not obtain by request, she 
resolved to seize by surprise.

Bellamy was again, however, announced; but the moment that, from her own 
chamber, she heard him descend the stairs, she flew to the dressing-room, and 
abruptly entered it.

The surprise she gave was not greater than that she received. Mrs. Berlinton, 
her fine eyes streaming with tears, and her white hands uplifted with an air of 
supplication, was evidently in an act of devotion. Camilla drew back, and would 
have retired, but she hastily dried her eyes, and said: 'Miss Tyrold? Do you 
want me? where's Miss—Miss Margland?'

'Ah! my dearest Mrs. Berlinton! my friend, as I had hoped, and by me, surely I 
trust loved for ever,' cried Camilla, throwing her arms round her neck, 'why 
this sorrow? why this distance? why this unkind avoidance?'

Mrs. Berlinton, who, at first, had shrunk from her embrace, now fell, in 
trembling agitation, upon her breast. Camilla hoped this was the instant to 
improve; when she appeared to be, herself, calling religion to her aid, and 
when the tenderness of her appeal seemed to bring back a movement of her first 
partiality. 'Suffer, suffer me,' she therefore cried, 'to speak to you now! 
hear me, my dear and amiable friend, with the sweetness that first won my 
affection!'

Mrs. Berlinton, affrighted, drew back, acknowledging herself unhappy; but 
shrinking from all discourse, and starting when Camilla named Bellamy, with a 
confusion she vainly strove to repress.

Unhackneyed in the world as was Camilla, her understanding and sense of right 
stood here in the place of experience, to point out the danger and impropriety 
surrounding her friend; and catching her by the gown, as she would have quitted 
the room, 'Mrs. Berlinton,' she emphatically cried, 'if you persist in this 
unhappy, this perilous intercourse, you risk your reputation, you risk my 
sister's peace, you risk even your own future condemnation!—O forgive me, 
forgive me! I see how I have affected you—but you would listen to no milder 
words!'

Mrs. Berlinton had sunk upon a chair, her hands clasped upon her forehead, and 
tears running rapidly down her cheeks. Brought up with religious terrours, yet 
ill instructed in religious principles, the dread of future punishment nearly 
demolished her, though no regular creed of right kept her consistently or 
systematically in any uniform exercise of good. But thus forcibly surprised 
into sudden conscientious recollections, she betrayed, rather than opened her 
heart, and acknowledged that she was weeping at a denial she had given to 
Bellamy; who, molested by the impossibility of ever conversing with her 
undisturbed, had entreated her to grant him, from time to time, a few hours 
society, in a peaceful retirement. 'Nor should I—nor could I—' she cried, 
'refuse him—for I have every reliance in his honour—but that the guilty 
world, ignorant of the purity of our friendship, might causelessly alarm my 
brother for my fame. And this, and the fear of any—though so 
groundless—uneasiness to your sister, makes me resist his powerful eloquence, 
and even my own notions of what is due to our exalted league of friendship.'

Camilla listened with horrour to this avowal, yet saw, with compassion, that 
her friend endeavoured to persuade herself she was free from wrong; though with 
censure that she sought to gloss over, rather than investigate, every doubt to 
the contrary: but while fear was predominant for the event of such a situation 
to herself, abhorrence filled her whole mind against Bellamy, in every part, 
every plan, and every probability of the business.

'O Mrs. Berlinton!' she cried, 'conquer this terrible infatuation, which 
obscures danger from your sight, and right from your discernment! Mr. Bellamy 
is married; and if you think, yourself, my sister would be hurt to know of 
these unhallowed leagues and bonds, you must be sure, with the least 
reflection, that they are wrong; you too, are married; and if Mr. Melmond would 
join with the world in contemning the extraordinary project you mention, you 
must feel, with the least reflexion, it ought not to be granted. Even were you 
both single, it would be equally improper, though not so wide spreading in its 
mischief. I have committed many errours; yet not one of them wilfully, or 
against conviction: nevertheless, the ill consequences that have ensued, tear 
me at this moment with repentant sorrow:—Ah! think then, what you—so 
tender, so susceptible, so feeling, will suffer, if with your apprehensions all 
awake, you listen to any request that may make my sister unhappy, or involve 
your deserving brother in any difficulty or hazard!'

Mrs. Berlinton was now subdued. Touched, terrified, and convinced, she embraced 
Camilla, wept in her arms, and promised to see Bellamy no more.

The next day arrived an answer from Lavinia, long, minute, and melancholy, but 
tenderly affectionate and replete with pity.

'Ah, my sister,' she began, 'we cannot yet meet! Our Mother is in no state to 
bear any added emotion. The firmness of her whole character, the fortitude of 
her whole life, hitherto unbroken by any passion, and superior to any 
misfortune, have both given way, suddenly and dreadfully, to the scene 
following her arrival.'

She then went back to particulars.

Mr. Clykes, she had heard, finding his bill for his own trouble positively 
refused, had conceived the Tyrold family in danger of bankruptcy, by the 
general rumours of the joint claimants of Lionel and Clermont; and imagining he 
had no time to lose, hoped by an arrest to frighten their Father to terms, in 
order to obviate the disgrace of such a measure. Their Father would, however, 
hear of none, nor pay any thing above the exact amount of the signed receipts 
of the various creditors; and submitted to the confinement, in preference to 
applying to any friend to be his bail, till he could consult with a lawyer. He 
was already at Winchester, where he had given Clykes a meeting, when the writ 
was served against him. He sent a dispatch to Etherington, to prevent any 
surprise at his not returning, and to desire the affair might not travel to 
Cleves, where Lavinia was then with Sir Hugh. This note, addressed to the upper 
servant, fell into the hands of Mrs. Tyrold herself, the next evening, upon her 
sudden arrival. She had been thus unexpectedly brought back by the news of the 
flight of Bellamy with Eugenia: her brother was still ill; but every 
consideration gave way to the maternal; and in the hope to yet rescue her 
daughter from this violator, she set off in a packet which was just sailing. 
But what, upon descending from the chaise, was the horrour of her first news! 
She went on instantly to Winchester, and alighting at an hotel, took a guide 
and went to the place of confinement.

'The meeting that ensued,' continued Lavinia, 'no one witnessed, but everyone 
may imagine. I will not therefore, wound your feelings, my dearest Camilla, 
with even touching upon my own. The impression, however, left upon the mind of 
our poor Mother, I should try vainly to disguise, since it has given her a 
shock that has forced from me the opening of this letter.'

She then besought her to take, nevertheless, some comfort, since she had the 
unspeakable satisfaction to inform her that their Father was returned to the 
rectory. He had been liberated, from the writ's being withdrawn; though without 
his consent, without even his knowledge, and contrary to his wishes. Nor was it 
yet ascertained by whom this was done, though circumstances allowed no division 
to their conjectures.

Harry Westwyn had learnt the terrible event in a ride he had accidentally taken 
to Winchester; and, upon returning to Cleves, had communicated it, with the 
most feeling circumspection, to herself. The excess of grief with which she had 
heard him, had seemed to penetrate to his quickly sensitive soul, 'for he is 
yet more amiable,' she added, 'than his Father's partiality paints him;' they 
agreed not to name it to Sir Hugh; though Harry assured her that no less than 
five gentlemen in the vicinity had already flown to Mr. Tyrold, to conjure to 
be accepted as his bail: but he chose first to consult his lawyer upon the 
validity of the claim made against him. All their care, however, was 
ineffectual; through some of the servants, Sir Hugh was informed of the affair, 
and his affliction was despair. He accused himself as being the cause of this 
evil, from the money he had borrowed for Clermont, which might wholly have been 
avoided, had he followed his brother's advice in immediate and severe 
retrenchments. These, however, he now began, in a manner that threatened to rob 
him of every comfort; and Mr. Westwyn was so much affected by his distress, 
that, to relieve him, at least, from the expence of two guests and their 
servants, he instantly took leave, promising nevertheless, to yet see him 
again, before he returned for the rest of his days to his native home. In a few 
hours after the departure of these gentlemen, news arrived that Mr. Tyrold was 
again at the rectory. Mr. Clykes had suddenly sent his receipt, in full of all 
demands, and then set off for London.

'There cannot be a doubt this was the deed of the generous Mr. Westwyn, in 
compact with his deserving Son,' continued Lavinia; 'they have been traced to 
Winchester; but we none of us know where, at present, to direct to them. The 
delight of my Uncle at this act of his worthy old friend, has extremely revived 
him. My Father is much dissatisfied the wretched Clykes should thus be paid all 
his fraudulent claims; but my Mother and my Uncle would, I believe, scarce have 
supported life under his longer confinement.'

The letter thus concluded.

'My Mother, when first she heard you were in town, was herself going to send 
for you; but when she understood that Miss Margland was with you, and you lived 
in utter seclusion from company, she said; "Since she is safe, I had rather not 
yet see her." Our beloved Father acquiesces, for he thinks you, at present, too 
much shaken, as well as herself, for so agitating an interview, till her mind 
is restored to its usual firmness. Judge then, my sister, since even he is for 
the delay, if your Lavinia can gather courage to plead against it?

'You know, my dearest Camilla, her extreme and tender fondness; you cannot, 
therefore, doubt, but her displeasure will soon pass away. But when, to the 
dreadful pangs of finding the hapless fate of Eugenia irremediable, was added 
the baneful sight of an adored Husband in custody, you cannot wonder such 
complicate shocks should have disordered her frame, and taught her,—even her, 
as my imcomparable Father has just said to me, "that always to be superior to 
calamity, demands a mental strength beyond the frail texture of the human 
composition; though to wish, and to try for it, shews we have that within, 
which aspires at a higher state, and prepares us for fuller perfection".'

'Can I better finish my letter than with words such as these? Adieu, then, my 
dear sister, I hope soon to write more cheerful tidings.

'Our poor Mother is gone to Belfont. What a meeting again there!

Lavinia Tyrold.'

A wish for death, immediate death, in common with every youthful mourner, in 
the first paroxysm of violent sorrow, was the sole sensation which accompanied 
the reading, or remained after the finishing of this letter, with Camilla. 
'Here,' she cried, falling prostrate, 'here might I but at once expire! close 
these unworthy eyes, forbidden to raise themselves to the authors of my 
existence! finish my short and culpable career, forgotten—since no longer 
cherished—by the parents I have offended—by the Mother who no longer wishes 
to see me!'

She laid down her head, and her sight became dim; a convulsive shivering, from 
feelings over-strained, and nerves dreadfully shattered, seized her; she sighed 
short and quick, and thought her prayer already accomplishing; but the delusion 
soon ceased; she found life still in its vigour, though bereft of its joy; and 
death no nearer to her frame, for being called upon by her wishes.

In the heaviness of disappointment, 'I have lived,' she cried, 'too long, and 
yet I cannot die! I am become an alien to my family, and a burthen to myself! 
ordered from my home by my Father, lest my sight should be destructive to my 
Mother—while my sister durst not even plead for me.... O happy Edgar! how 
great has been thy escape not to have taken for thy wife this excommunicated 
wretch!'—

To live thus, seemed to her impossible; to pass even the day in such 
wretchedness she believed impracticable. Any, every period appeared to her 
preferable, and in the desperation of her heart, she determined instantly to 
pursue her Mother to Belfont; and there, by the gentle intercession of Eugenia, 
to obtain her pardon, or, which she thought immediately would follow its 
refusal, to sink to death at her feet.

Relieved from the intenseness of her agony by this plan, and ever eager to 
pursue the first idea that arose, she flew to borrow from Mrs. Berlinton her 
post-chaise for the next morning, and to supplicate that Miss Margland would 
accompany her to Belfont; whence, if she missed Mrs. Tyrold, they could easily 
return the same day, as the distance was not more than thirteen miles.

The chaise was accorded promptly by Mrs. Berlinton, and no regret expressed at 
the uncertainty of Camilla whether or not she should return; but Miss Margland, 
though burning with curiosity to see Eugenia as Mrs. Bellamy, would not quit 
town, from continual expectation of some news of Indiana.

At an early hour the following morning, and feeling as if suspended but by a 
thread between life and death, Camilla set off for Belfont.
