
A New View of an old Mansion

Camilla, for some time, bestowed no thought upon what she was doing, nor 
whither she was going. A scene so dreadful as that she now quitted, and a 
character of such utter unworthiness as that with which her sister for life was 
tied, absorbed her faculties, and nearly broke her heart.

When she stopt, however, at Bagshot, for fresh horses, the obligation of giving 
directions to others, made her think of herself; and, bewildered with 
uncertainty whether the step she took were right or wrong, she regretted she 
had not, at least, desired to stay till the answer arrived from Etherington. 
Yet her journey had the sanction of Eugenia's concurrence; and Eugenia seemed 
to her oracular.

When she came upon the cross road leading from Winchester to Cleves, and felt 
her quick approach to the spot so loved yet dreaded, the horses seemed to her 
to fly. Twenty times she called out to the driver not to hurry; who as often 
assured her the bad roads prevented any haste; she wanted to form some 
appropriate plan and speech for every emergence; but she could suggest none for 
any. She was now at the feet of her Mother, now kissing the hands of her 
Father, now embraced again by her fond uncle;—and now rejected by them all. 
But while her fancy was at work alternately to soothe and to torture her, the 
park lodge met her eyes, with still no resolution taken.

Vehemently she stopt the chaise. To drive in through the park would call a 
general attention, and she wished, ere her arrival were announced, to consult 
alone with Lavinia. She resolved, therefore, to get out of the carriage, and 
run by a private path, to a small door at the back of the house, whence she 
could glide to the chamber commonly appropriated to her sister.

She told the postillion to wait, and alighting, walked quick and fearfully 
towards the lodge.

She passed through the park-gate for foot passengers without notice from the 
porter. It was twilight. She saw no one; and rejoiced in the general vacancy. 
Trembling, but with celerity, she 'skimmed,' like her celebrated name-sake, the 
turf; and annoyed only by the shadows of the trees, which all, as first they 
caught her eye, seemed the precursors of the approach of Mrs. Tyrold, speedily 
reached the mansion: but when she came to the little door by which she meant to 
enter, she found it fastened.

To the front door she durst not go, from the numerous chances by which she 
might surprise some of the family in the hall: and to present herself at the 
servant's gate would have an appearance degrading and clandestine.

She recollected, at last, the sash-door of a bow-window belonging to a room 
that was never occupied but in summer. Thither she went, and knowing the spring 
by which it could be opened on the outside, let herself into the house.

With steps not to be heard, and scarce breathing, she got thence into a long 
stone passage, whence she meant to mount the back stairs.

She was relieved by not meeting anyone in the way, though surprised to hear no 
foot-steps about the house, and no voices from any of the apartments.

Cautiously she went on, looking round at every step, to avoid any sudden 
encounter; but when she came to the bed-chamber gallery, she saw that the door 
of the room of Sir Hugh, by which she must necessarily pass, was wide open.

It was possible he might be in it: she had not courage to pass; her sight, thus 
unprepared, after so many heavy evils, might be too affecting for his weak 
frame. She turned short round, and entered a large apartment at the head of the 
stairs, called the billiard-room, where she resolved to wait and watch ere she 
ventured any further.

Its aspect was to the front of the house; she stole gently to a window, whence 
she thought the melancholy of her own mind pervaded the park. None of her 
uncle's horses were in sight; no one was passing to and fro; and she looked 
vainly even for the house-dog who ordinarily patrolled before the mansion.

She ventured to bend forwarder, to take a view of the side wings; these, 
however, presented not any sight more exhilarating nor more animated. Nothing 
was in motion, no one was visible, not even a fire blazed cheerfulness.

She next strove to catch a glance of the windows belonging to the chamber of 
Eugenia; but her sigh, though sad, was without surprise to see their shutters 
shut. Those of Indiana were closed also. 'How mournfully,' cried she, 'is all 
changed! what of virtues are gone with Eugenia! what of beauty with Indiana! 
the one so constantly interesting! the other looking always so lovely!'—

But deeper still was her sigh, since mingled with self-reproach, to perceive 
her own chamber also shut up. 'Alas!' she cried, 'my poor uncle considers us 
all as dead to him!' She durst not lean sufficiently forward to examine the 
drawing-room, in which she concluded the family assembled; but she observed, 
with wonder, that even the library was not open, though it was still too light 
for candles; and Dr. Orkborne, who usually sat there, from the forgetfulness of 
application, was the last to demand them.

The fear of discovery was now combated by an anxiety to see some one,—any 
one, ... and she returned to the passage. All there was still quiet, and she 
hazarded gliding past the open door, though without daring to look into the 
room; but when she came to the chamber of Lavinia, which she softly entered, 
all was dark, and it was evidently not in present use.

This was truly distressful. She concluded her sister was returned to 
Etherington, and knew not to whom to apply for counsel or mediation. She no 
longer, however, feared meeting her parents, who certainly had not made her 
sister quit Cleves without themselves; and, after a little hesitation, relying 
upon the ever sure lenity of her uncle, she determined to cast herself upon his 
kindness: but first to send in a short note, to avoid giving him any surprise.

She returned down the gallery, meaning to apply for pen and ink to the first 
person she could find: she could only, she knew, meet with a friend; unless, by 
ill fortune, she should encounter Miss Margland, the way to whose apartment she 
sedulously shunned.

No longer, however, quite so cautious, she stopt near the chamber of Sir Hugh, 
and convinced by the stillness it was empty, could not resist stepping into the 
apartment.

It looked despoiled and forsaken. Nothing was in its wonted order; his 
favourite guns hung not over the chimney-piece; the corners of the room were 
emptied of his sticks; his great chair was in a new place; no cushions for his 
dogs were near the fire; the bedstead was naked.

She now felt petrified; she sunk on the floor, to ejaculate a prayer for his 
safety, but knew not how to rise again, for terrour; nor which way next to 
turn, nor what even to conjecture.

Thus she remained, till suspense grew worse than certainty, and she forced 
herself from the room to seek some explanation. It was possible the whole 
family residence might be changed to the back front of the house. She descended 
the stairs with almost equal apprehension of meeting any one or seeing no one. 
The stone passage was now nearly dark. It was always the first part of the 
house that was lighted, as its windows were small and high: but no preparations 
were now making for that purpose. She went to the house-keeper's room, which 
was at the foot of the stairs she had descended. The door was shut, and she 
could not open it. She tried repeatedly, but vainly, to be heard by soft taps 
and whisperings; no one answered.

Amazed, confounded, she turned slowly another away; not a soul was in sight, 
not a sound within hearing. Every thing looked desolate, all the family seemed 
to be vanished.

Insensibly, yet irresistibly, she now moved on towards the drawing-room. The 
door was shut. She hesitated whether or not to attempt it. She listened. She 
hoped to catch the voice of her uncle: but all was inviolably still.

This was the only place of assembling in the evening; but her uncle might have 
dropt asleep, and she would not hazard startling him with her presence. She 
would sooner go to the hall at once, and be announced in the common way by a 
servant.

But what was her astonishment in coming to the hall, to find neither servant, 
light nor fire? and the marble pavement covered with trunks, packing mats, 
straw, ropes, and boxes? Terrified and astonished, she thought herself walking 
in her sleep. She could combine no ideas, either good or bad, to account for 
such a scene, and she looked at it bewildered and incredulous.

After a long hesitation, spent in wonder rather than thought, she at length 
determined to enter the breakfast parlour, and ring the bell: when the distant 
sound of a carriage, that was just entering the park, made her shut herself 
into the room, hastily, but silently.

It advanced rapidly; she trembled; it was surely, she thought, her Mother.

When it drove up to the portico, and she heard the house-bell ring, she 
instinctively barred her door; but finding no one approach to the call, while 
the bell was impatiently re-rung, her strong emotions of expectation were 
taking her again into the hall: but as her hand was upon the lock of the door, 
a light glimmered through the key hole. She heard some step advancing, and 
precipitately drew back.

The hall-door was now opened, and a man enquired for a young lady just come 
from Alresford.

'There's no young lady here at all,' was the answer, in the voice of Jacob.

Finding it only her own driver, she ventured out; crying 'O Jacob! where is my 
dear uncle?'

Jacob was, at first, incapable of all answer, through surprise at her strange 
appearance; but then said, 'O Miss Camilla! you'll go nigh to break your good 
heart when you knows it all! But how, you've got into the house is what I can't 
guess; but I wish, for my poor master's sake, it had been before now!'

Horrour crept through every vein of Camilla, in the explanation she awaited of 
this fearful mystery. She motioned to the driver to stay, returned back to the 
parlour, and beckoned, for she could not speak, to Jacob to follow her.

When he came, and, shutting the door, was beginning a diffuse lamentation, 
eagerness to avert lengthened suspense recovered her voice, and she 
passionately exclaimed: 'Jacob! in two words, where is my uncle?—Is he well?'

'Why, yes, Miss Camilla, considering—' he began; but Camilla, whose fears had 
been fatal, interrupted him with fervent thanksgiving, till she was called back 
from joy by the following words:

'He's gone away Miss Camilla! gone Lord knows where! given up all his grand 
house-keeping, turned off almost all his poor servants, left this fine place, 
to have it let to whoever will hire it, and is going to live, he says, in some 
poor little lodging, till he can scrape together wherewithal to pay off every 
thing for your papa.'

A thunder-bolt that had instantly destroyed her, would gratefully have been 
received, in preference to this speech, by Camilla, who, casting up her hands 
and eyes, exclaimed: 'Then am I the most detestable, as well as the most 
wretched of human beings! My Father I have imprisoned!—my Uncle I have turned 
from his house and home! and for thee, O my Mother!—this is the reception I 
have prepared!'

Jacob tried to console her; but his account was only added torture.

The very instant he told her, that his master had received the news of the 
arrest of Mr. Tyrold, he determined upon this violent plan; and though the so 
speedy release, through the generosity of Mr. Westwyn, had exceedingly calmed 
his first emotions, he would not change his purpose, and protested he would 
never indulge himself in peace nor comfort more, till he had cleared off their 
joint debts; of which he attributed the whole fault to himself, from having 
lived up to the very verge of his yearly income, when he ought, he said, 
considering there were so many young people, to have always kept a few odd sums 
at hand for accidents. 'We all did what we could,' continued Jacob, 'to put him 
off from such a thing, but all to no purpose; but if you'd been here, Miss 
Camilla, you'd have done more with him than all of us put together: but he 
called Miss Lavinia and all of us up to him, and said to us, I won't have 
nobody tell this to my poor little girl, meaning you, Miss Camilla, till I've 
got somewhere settled and comfortable; because of her kind heart, says he.'

Tenderness so partial, at so suffering an instant, almost killed Camilla. 'O 
Jacob,' she cried, 'where is now my dear generous uncle? I will follow him in 
this chaise (rushing out as she spoke) I will be his servant, his nurse, and 
attend him from morning to night!'

She hurried into the carriage as she spoke, and bade him give directions to the 
postillion. But when she heard he was, at present, only at Etherington, whence 
he was seeking a new abode, her head drooped, and she burst into tears.

Jacob remained, he said, alone, to take care of all the things, and to shew the 
place to such as might come.

Miss Margland had been at the house about three hours ago; and had met Sir 
Hugh, who had come over, to give directions about what he would have packed up; 
and he had read a letter from Miss Indy that was, and had forgiven her; but he 
was sore vexed Miss Margland had come without Miss Camilla; only she said Miss 
Camilla was at Mrs. Bellamy's, and she did not call, because she thought it 
would be better to go back again, and see more about Miss Indy, and so bring 
Miss Camilla next time; so she wheedled his master to spare the chaise again, 
and let her go off directly to settle every thing to Miss Indy's mind.

Camilla now repented she had not returned to Mrs. Berlinton's, there, 
notwithstanding all objections, to have waited her recall; since there her 
parents still believed her, and thence, under the protection of Miss Margland, 
would in all probability summon her. To present herself, after this barbarous 
aggravation of the calamities she had caused, undemanded and unforgiven at 
Etherington, she thought impossible. She enquired if, by passing the night at 
Cleves, she might have any chance of seeing her uncle the next day. Jacob 
answered, no; but that Mr. Tyrold himself, with a gentleman from Winchester, 
who thought of hiring the house, were to be there early in the morning to take 
a survey of the premises.

A meeting, thus circumstanced, with her Father, at a moment when he came upon 
so direful a business, as parting with a place of which she had herself 
occasioned the desertion, seemed to her insupportable: and she resolved to 
return immediately to Belfont, to see there if her answer from Lavinia 
contained any new directions; and if not, to again go to London, and await 
final commands; without listening ever more to any hopes, projects, or 
judgments of her own.

Beseeching the worthy Jacob to pardon her non-payment, with every kind 
assurance that her uncle should know all his goodness, she told the postillion 
to take her to Belfont.

He could go no further, he said, and that but a foot pace, than to Alresford. 
Jacob marvelled, but blessed her, and Camilla, ejaculating, 'Adieu, dear happy 
Cleves!' was driven out of the park.
