
A Vision

When the first violence of this paroxysm of sorrow abated, Camilla again strove 
to pray, and found that nothing so much stilled her. Yet, her faculties 
confused, hurried, and in anguish, permitted little more than incoherent 
ejaculations. Again she sighed for her Father; again the spirit of his 
instructions recurred, and she enquired who was the clergyman of the parish, 
and if he would be humane enough to come and pray by one who had no claim upon 
him as a parishioner.

Peggy said he was a very good gentleman, and never refused even the poorest 
person, that begged his attendance.

'O go to him, then,' cried she, 'directly! Tell him a sick and helpless 
stranger implores that he will read to her the prayers for the dying!... Should 
I yet live ... they will compose and make me better;—if not ... they will 
give me courage for my quick exit.'

Peggy went forth, and she lay her beating head upon the pillow, and endeavoured 
to quiet her nerves for the sacred ceremony she demanded.

It was dark, and she was alone; the corpse she had just quitted seemed still 
bleeding in full view. She closed her eyes, but still saw it; she opened them, 
but it was always there. She felt nearly stiff with horrour, chilled, frozen, 
with speechless apprehension.

A slumber, feverish nearly to delirium, at length surprised her harassed 
faculties; but not to afford them rest. Death, in a visible figure, ghastly, 
pallid, severe, appeared before her, and with its hand, sharp and forked, 
struck abruptly upon her breast. She screamed—but it was heavy as cold, and 
she could not remove it. She trembled; she shrunk from its touch; but it had 
iced her heart-strings. Every vein was congealed; every stiffened limb 
stretched to its full length, was hard as marble: and when again she made a 
feeble effort to rid her oppressed lungs of the dire weight that had fallen 
upon them, a voice hollow, deep, and distant, dreadfully pierced her ear, 
calling out: 'Thou hast but thy own wish! Rejoice, thou murmurer, for thou 
diest!' Clearer, shriller, another voice quick vibrated in the air: 'Whither 
goest thou,' it cried, 'and whence comest thou?'

A voice from within, over which she thought she had no controul, though it 
seemed issuing from her vitals, low, hoarse, and tremulous, answered, 'Whither 
I go, let me rest! Whence I come from let me not look back! Those who gave me 
birth, I have deserted; my life, my vital powers I have rejected.' Quick then 
another voice assailed her, so near, so loud, so terrible ... she shrieked at 
its horrible sound. 'Prematurely,' it cried, 'thou art come, uncalled, 
unbidden; thy task unfulfilled, thy peace unearned. Follow, follow me! the 
Records of Eternity are opened. Come! write with thy own hand thy claims, thy 
merits to mercy!' A repelling self-accusation instantaneously overwhelmed her. 
'O, no! no! no!' she exclaimed, 'let me not sign my own miserable 
insufficiency!' In vain was her appeal. A force unseen, yet irresistible, 
impelled her forward. She saw the immense volumes of Eternity, and her own hand 
involuntarily grasped a pen of iron, and with a velocity uncontroulable wrote 
these words: 'Without resignation, I have prayed for death: from impatience of 
displeasure, I have desired annihilation: to dry my own eyes, I have left ... 
pitiless, selfish, unnatural!... a Father the most indulgent, a Mother almost 
idolizing, to weep out their's!' Her head would have sunk upon the guilty 
characters; but her eye-lids refused to close, and kept them glaring before 
her. They became, then, illuminated with burning sulphur. She looked another 
way; but they partook of the same motion; she cast her eyes upwards, but she 
saw the characters still; she turned from side to side; but they were always 
her object. Loud again sounded the same direful voice: 'These are thy deserts; 
write now thy claims:—and next,—and quick,—turn over the immortal leaves, 
and read thy doom....' 'Oh, no!' she cried, 'Oh, no!... O, let me yet return! 
O, Earth, with all thy sorrows, take, take me once again, that better I may 
learn to work my way to that last harbour, which rejecting the criminal 
repiner, opens its soft bosom to the firm, though supplicating sufferer!' In 
vain again she called;—pleaded, knelt, wept in vain. The time, she found, was 
past; she had slighted it while in her power; it would return to her no more; 
and a thousand voices at once, with awful vibration, answered aloud to every 
prayer, 'Death was thy own desire!' Again, unlicensed by her will, her hand 
seized the iron instrument. The book was open that demanded her claims. She 
wrote with difficulty ... but saw that her pen made no mark! She looked upon 
the page, when she thought she had finished, ... but the paper was blank!... 
Voices then, by hundreds, by thousands, by millions, from side to side, above, 
below, around, called out, echoed and re-echoed, 'Turn over, turn over ... and 
read thy eternal doom!' In the same instant, the leaf, untouched, burst open 
... and ... she awoke. But in a trepidation so violent, the bed shook under 
her, the cold sweat, in large drops, fell from her forehead, and her heart 
still seemed labouring under the adamantine pressure of the inflexibly cold 
grasp of death. So exalted was her imagination, so confused were all her 
thinking faculties, that she stared with wild doubt whether then, or whether 
now, what she experienced were a dream.

In this suspensive state, fearing to call, to move, or almost to breathe, she 
remained, in perfect stillness, and in the dark, till little Peggy crept softly 
into the chamber.

Certain then of her situation, 'This has been,' she cried, 'only a vision—but 
my conscience has abetted it, and I cannot shake it off.'

When she became calmer, and further recollected herself, she anxiously enquired 
if the clergyman would not come.

Peggy, hesitatingly, acknowledged he had not been sent for; her mistress had 
imagined the request proceeded from a disturbance of mind, owing to the sight 
of the corpse, and said she was sure, after a little sleep, it would be 
forgotten.

'Alas!' said Camilla, disappointed, 'it is more necessary than ever! my senses 
are wandering; I seem hovering between life and death—Ah! let not my own 
fearful fancies absorb this hour of change, which religious rites should 
consecrate!'

She then told Peggy to plead for her to her mistress, and assure her that 
nothing else, after the dreadful shock she had received, could still her mind.

Mrs. Marl, not long after came into the room herself; and enquiring how she 
did, said, if she was really bent upon such a melancholy thing, the clergyman 
had luckily just called, and would read the service to her directly, if it 
would give her any comfort.

'O, great and infinite comfort!' she cried, and begged he might come 
immediately, and read to her the prayer for those of whom there is but small 
hope of recovery. She would have risen, that she might kneel; but her limbs 
would not second her desire, and she was obliged to lie still upon the outside 
of the bed. Peggy drew the curtains, to shade her eyes, as a candle was brought 
into the room; but when she heard Mrs. Marl say: 'Come in, Sir,'—and 'here's 
the prayer-book;' overpowered with tender recollection of her Father, to whom 
such offices were frequent, she burst into an agony of tears, and hid her face 
upon the pillow.

She soon, however, recovered, and the solemnity of the preparation overawed her 
sorrow. Mrs. Marl placed the light as far as possible from the bed, and when 
Camilla waved her hand in token of being ready, said, 'Now, Sir, if you please.'

He complied, though not immediately; but no sooner had he begun, no sooner 
devoutly, yet tremblingly, pronounced, O Father of Mercies! than a faint scream 
issued from the bed.—

He stopt; but she did not speak; and after a short pause, he resumed: but not a 
second sentence was pronounced when she feebly ejaculated, 'Ah heaven!' and the 
book fell from his hands.

She strove to raise her head; but could not; she opened, however, the side 
curtain, to look out; he advanced, at the same moment, to the foot of the bed 
... fixed his eyes upon her face, and in a voice that seemed to come from his 
soul, exclaimed, 'Camilla!'

With a mental emotion that, for an instant, restored her strength, she drew 
again the curtain, covered up her face, and sobbed even audibly, while the 
words, 'O Edgar!' vainly sought vent.

He attempted not to unclose the curtain she had drawn, but with a deep groan, 
dropping upon his knees on the outside, cried, 'Great God!' but checking 
himself, hastily arose, and motioning to Mrs. Marl and to Peggy, to move out of 
hearing, said, through the curtain; 'O Camilla! what dire calamity has brought 
this about?—speak, I implore!—why are you here?—why alone? speak! speak!'

He heard she was weeping, but received no answer, and with energy next to 
torture exclaimed; 'Refuse not to trust me!—recollect our long 
friendship—forgive—forget its alienation!—By all you have ever 
valued—by all your wonted generosity—I call—I appeal.... Camilla! 
Camilla!—your silence rends my soul!'

Camilla had no utterance, yet could not resist this urgency, and gently through 
the opening of the curtain, put forth her feeble hand.

He seemed affected to agony; he held it between each of his own, and while 
softly he uttered, 'O ever—unchangeably generous Camilla!' she felt it 
moistened with his tears.

Too weak for the new sensation this excited, she drew it away, and the violence 
of her emotion menacing an hysteric fit, Mrs. Marl came back to her, and 
wringing his hands as he looked around the room, he tore himself away.
