
Questions and Answers

Mr. Tyrold did not return till the next day from Belfont, where, through the 
account he gave from his Daughter, the violent exit of the miserable Bellamy 
was brought in accidental death. Various circumstances had now acquainted him 
with the history of that wretched man, who was the younger son of the master of 
a great gaming-house. In his first youth, he had been utterly neglected, and 
left to run wild whither he chose; but his father afterwards becoming very 
rich, had bestowed upon him as good an education as the late period at which it 
was begun could allow. He was intended for a lucrative business; but he had no 
application, and could retain no post: he went into the army; but he had no 
courage, and was speedily cashiered. Inheriting a passion for the means by 
which the parental fortune had been raised, he devoted himself next to its 
pursuit, and won very largely. But as extravagance and good luck, by long 
custom, go hand in hand, he spent as fast as he acquired; and upon a tide of 
fortune in his disfavour, was tempted to reverse the chances by unfair play, 
was found out, and as ignominiously chaced from the field of hazard as from 
that of patriotism. His father was no more; his eldest brother would not assist 
him; he sold therefore his house, and all he possessed but his wardrobe, and, 
relying upon a very uncommonly handsome face and person, determined to seek a 
fairer lot, by eloping, if possible, with some heiress. He thought it, however, 
prudent not only to retire from London, but to make a little change in his 
name, which from Nicholas Gwigg he refined into Alphonso Bellamy. He began his 
career by a tour into Wales; where he insinuated himself into the acquaintance 
of Mrs. Ecton, just after she had married Miss Melmond to Mr. Berlinton: and 
though this was not an intercourse that could travel to Gretna Green, the 
beauty and romantic turn of the bride of so disproportioned a marriage, opened 
to his unprincipled mind a scheme yet more flagitious. Fortunately, however, 
for his fair destined prey, soon after the connexion was formed, she left 
Wales; and the search of new adventures carried him, by various chances, into 
Hampshire. But he had established with her, a correspondence, and when he had 
caught, or rather forced, an heiress into legal snares, the discovery of who 
and what he was, became less important, and he ventured again to town, and 
renewed his heinous plan, as well as his inveterate early habits; till 
surprised by some unpleasant recollectors, debts of honour, which he had found 
it convenient to elude upon leaving the Capital, were claimed, and he found it 
impossible to appear without satisfying such demands. Thence his cruel and 
inordinate persecution of his unhappy wife for money; and thence, ultimately, 
the brief vengeance which had reverberated upon his own head.

Camilla, whose danger was the result of self-neglect, as her sufferings had all 
flowed from mental anguish, was already able to go down to the study upon the 
arrival of Mr. Tyrold: where she received, with grateful rapture, the tender 
blessings which welcomed her to the paternal arms—to her home—to peace—to 
safety—and primæval joy.

Mr. Tyrold, sparing to her yet weak nerves any immediate explanations upon the 
past, called upon his wife to aid him to communicate, in the quietest manner, 
what had been done at Belfont to Eugenia; charging Camilla to take no part in a 
scene inevitably shocking.

Once more in the appropriate apartment of her Father, where all her earliest 
scenes of gayest felicity had passed, but which, of late, she had only 
approached with terrour, only entered to weep, she experienced a delight almost 
awful in the renovation of her pristine confidence, and fearless ease. She took 
from her pocket—where alone she could ever bear to keep it—her loved 
locket, delighting to attribute to it this restoration to domestic enjoyment; 
though feeling at the same time, a renewal of suspence from the return of its 
donor, and from the affecting interview into which she had been surprised, that 
broke in upon even her filial happiness, with bitter, tyrannical regret. Yet 
she pressed to her bosom the cherished symbol of first regard, and was holding 
it to her lips, when Mrs. Tyrold, unexpectedly, re-entered the room.

In extreme confusion, she shut it into its shagreen case, and was going to 
restore it to her pocket; but infolding it, with her daughter's hand, between 
each of her own, Mrs. Tyrold said, 'Shall I ever, my dear girl, learn the 
history of this locket?'

'O yes, my dearest Mother,' said the blushing Camilla, 'of that—and of 
every—and of all things—you have only—you have merely—'

'If it distresses you, my dear child, we will leave it to another day,' said 
Mrs. Tyrold, whose eyes Camilla saw, as she now raised her own, were swimming 
in tears.

'My Mother! my dearest Mother!' cried she, with the tenderest alarm, 'has any 
thing new happened?—Is Eugenia greatly affected?'

'She is all, every way, and in every respect,' said Mrs. Tyrold, 'whatever the 
fondest, or even the proudest Mother could wish. But I do not at this instant 
most think of her. I am not without some fears for my Camilla's strength, in 
the immediate demand that may be made upon her fortitude. Tell me, my child, 
with that sincerity which so long has been mutually endearing between us, tell 
me if you think you can see here, again, and as usual, without any risk to your 
health, one long admitted and welcomed as a part of the family?'

She started, changed colour, looked up, cast her eyes on the floor; but soon 
seeing Mrs. Tyrold hold an handkerchief bathed in tears to her face, lost all 
dread, and even all consciousness in tender gratitude, and throwing her arms 
round her neck, 'O my Mother,' she cried, 'you who weep not for 
yourself—scarcely even in the most poignant sorrow—can you weep for me?—I 
will see—or I will avoid whoever you please—I shall want no fortitude, I 
shall fear nothing—no one—not even myself—now again under your 
protection! I will scarcely even think, my beloved Mother, but by your 
guidance!'

'Compose yourself, then, my dearest girl: and, if you believe you are equal to 
behaving with firmness, I will not refuse his request of re-admission.'

'His request?' repeated Camilla, with involuntary quickness; but finding Mrs. 
Tyrold did not notice it, gently adding, 'That person that—I believe—you 
mean—has done nothing, my dear Mother, to merit expulsion!—'

'I am happy to hear you say so: I have been fearfully, I must own, and even 
piercingly displeased with him.'

'Ah, my dear Mother! how kind was the partiality that turned your displeasure 
so wrong a way! that made you,—even you, my dear Mother, listen to your 
fondness rather than to your justice!—'

She trembled at the temerity of this vindication the moment it had escaped her, 
and looking another way, spoke again of Eugenia: but Mrs. Tyrold now, taking 
both her hands, and seeking, though vainly, to meet her eyes, said, 'My dearest 
child, I grow painfully anxious to end a thousand doubts; to speak and to hear 
with no further ambiguity, nor reserve. If Edgar—'

Camilla again changed colour, and strove to withdraw her hands.

'Take courage, my dear love, and let one final explanation relieve us both at 
once. If Edgar has merited well of you, why are you parted?—If ill—why this 
solicitude my opinion of him should be unshaken?'

Her head now dropt upon Mrs. Tyrold's shoulder, as she faintly answered, 'He 
deserves your good opinion, my dearest Mother—for he adores you—I cannot be 
unjust to him,—though he has made me—I own—not very happy!'

'Designedly, my Camilla?'

'O, no, my dearest Mother!—he would not do that to an enemy!'

'Speak out, then, and speak clearer, my dearest Camilla. If you think of him so 
well, and are so sure of his good intentions, what—in two words,—what is it 
that has parted you?'

'Accident, my dearest Mother,—deluding appearances, ... and false internal 
reasoning on my part,—and on his, continual misconstruction! O my dearest 
Mother! how have I missed your guiding care! I had ever the semblance, by some 
cruel circumstance, some inexplicable fatality of incident, to neglect his 
counsel, oppose his judgment, deceive his expectations, and trifle with his 
regard!—Yet, with a heart faithful, grateful, devoted,—O my dearest 
Mother!—with an esteem that defies all comparison, ... a respect closely 
meliorating even to veneration!... Never was heart ... my dearest Mother, so 
truly impressed with the worth of another ... with the nobleness....'

A buzzing noise from the adjoining parlour, sounding something between a 
struggle and a dispute, suddenly stopt her, ... and as she raised her head from 
the bosom of her Mother, in which she had seemed seeking shelter from the very 
confidence she was pouring forth, she saw the door opened, and the object of 
whom she was speaking appear at it.... Fluttered, colouring, trembling, ... yet 
with eyes refulgent with joy, and every feature speaking ecstasy.

Almost fainting with shame and surprise, she gave herself up as disgraced, if 
not dishonoured evermore, for a short, but bitter half moment. It was not 
longer. Edgar, rushing forward, and seizing the hands of Mrs. Tyrold, even 
while they were encircling her drooping, shrinking, half expiring Camilla, 
pressed them with ardent respect to his lips, rapidly exclaiming, 'My more than 
Mother! my dear, kind, excellent, inestimable friend!—Forgive this blest 
intrusion—plead for me where I dare not now speak—and raise your indeed 
maternal eyes upon the happiest—the most devoted of your family!'

'What is it overpowers me thus this morning?' cried Mrs. Tyrold, leaning her 
head upon her clinging Camilla, while large drops fell from her eyes; 
'Misfortune, I see, is not the greatest test of our philosophy!... Joy, twice 
to-day, has completely demolished mine!'

'What goodness is this! what encouragement to hope some indulgent intercession 
here—where the sense that now breaks in upon me of ungenerous ... ever to be 
lamented—and I had nearly said, execrated doubt, fills me with shame and 
regret—and makes me—even at this soft reviving, heart-restoring moment, 
feel undeserving my own hopes!'—

'Shall I ... may I leave him to make his peace?' whispered Mrs. Tyrold to her 
daughter, whose head sought concealment even to annihilation; but whose arms, 
with what force they possessed, detained her, uttering faintly but rapidly, 'O 
no, no, no!'

'My more than Mother!' again cried Edgar, 'I will wait till that felicity may 
be accorded me, and put myself wholly under your kind and powerful influence. 
One thing alone I must say;—I have too much to answer for, to take any share 
of the misdemeanors of another!—I have not been a treacherous listener, 
though a wilful obtruder.... See, Mrs. Tyrold! who placed me in that room—who 
is the accomplice of my happiness!'

With a smile that seemed to beam but the more brightly for her glistening eyes, 
Mrs. Tyrold looked to the door, and saw there, leaning against it, the form she 
most revered; surveying them all with an expression of satisfaction so perfect, 
contentment so benign, and pleasure mingled with so much thankfulness, that her 
tears now flowed fast from unrestrained delight; and Mr. Tyrold, approaching to 
press at once the two objects of his most exquisite tenderness to his breast, 
said, 'This surprise was not planned, but circumstances made it more than 
irresistible. It was not, however, quite fair to my Camilla, and if she is 
angry, we will be self-exiled till she can pardon us.'

'This is such a dream,'—cried Camilla, as now, first, from the voice of her 
Father she believed it reality; 'so incredible ... so unintelligible ... I find 
it entirely ... impossible ... impossible to comprehend any thing I see or 
hear!'—

'Let the past, ... not the present,' cried Edgar, 'be regarded as the dream! 
and generously drive it from your mind as a fever of the brain, with which 
reason had no share, and for which memory must find no place.'

'If I could understand in the least,' said Camilla, 'what this all means ... 
what——'

Mr. Tyrold now insisted that Edgar should retreat, while he made some 
explanation; and then related to his trembling, doubting, wondering daughter, 
the following circumstances.

In returning from Belfont, he had stopt at the half-way-house, where he had 
received from Mrs. Marl, a letter that, had it reached him as it was intended, 
at Etherington, would have quickened the general meeting, yet nearly have 
broken his heart. It was that which, for want of a messenger, had never been 
sent, and which Peggy, in cleaning the bed room, had found under a table, where 
it had fallen, she supposes, when the candle was put upon it for reading 
prayers.

'There was another letter, too!' interrupted Camilla, with quick blushing 
recollection;—'but my illness ... and all that has followed, made me forget 
them both till this very moment.... Did she say anything of any ... other?'

'Yes; ... the other had been delivered according to its address.'

'Good Heaven!'

'Be not frightened, my Camilla, ... all has been beautifully directed for the 
best. My accomplice had received his early in the morning; he was at the house, 
by some fortunate hazard, when it was found, and, being well known there, Mrs. 
Marl gave it to him immediately.'

'How terrible!... It was meant only in case ... I had seen no one any more!...'

'The intent, and the event, have been happily, my child, at war. He came 
instantly hither, and enquired for me; I was not returned; he asked my route, 
and rode to follow or meet me. About an hour ago, we encountered upon the road: 
he gave his horse to his groom, and came into the chaise to me.'

Camilla now could with difficulty listen; but her Father hastened to acquaint 
her, that Edgar, with the most generous apologies, the most liberal self-blame, 
had re-demanded his consent for a union, from which every doubt was wholly, and 
even miraculously removed, by learning thus the true feelings of her heart, as 
depicted at the awful crisis of expected dissolution. The returning smiles 
which forced their way now through the tears and blushes of Camilla, shewed how 
vainly she strove to mingle the regret of shame with the felicity of fond 
security, produced by this eventful accident. But when she further heard that 
Edgar, in Flanders, had met with Lionel, who, in frankly recounting his 
difficulties and adventures, had named some circumstances which had so shaken 
every opinion that had urged him to quit England, as to induce him instantly, 
from the conference, to seek a passage for his return, she felt all but 
happiness retire from her heart;—vanish even from her ideas.

'You are not angry, then,' said Mr. Tyrold, as smilingly he read her delighted 
sensations, 'that I waited not to consult you? That I gave back at once my 
consent? That I folded him again in my arms?... again ... called him my son?'

She could but seek the same pressure; and he continued, 'I would not bring him 
in with me; I was not aware my dear girl was so rapidly recovered, and I had a 
task to fulfil to my poor Eugenia that was still my first claim. But I promised 
within an hour, your Mother, at least, should welcome him. He would walk, he 
said, for that period. When I met her, I hinted at what was passing, and she 
followed me to our Eugenia; I then briefly communicated my adventure; and your 
Mother, my Camilla, lost herself in hearing it! Will you not, ... like me!... 
withdraw from her all reverence? Her eyes gushed with tears, ... she wept, as 
you weep at this moment; she was sure Edgar Mandlebert could alone preserve you 
from danger, yet make you happy—Was she wrong, my dear child? Shall we attack 
now her judgment, as well as her fortitude?'

Only at her feet could Camilla shew her gratitude; to action she had recourse, 
for words were inadequate, and the tenderest caresses now spoke best for them 
all.

Respect for the situation of Eugenia, who had desired, for this week, to live 
wholly up stairs and alone, determined Mr. and Mrs. Tyrold to keep back for 
some time the knowledge of this event from the family. Camilla was most happy 
to pay such an attention to her sister; but when Mr. Tyrold was leaving her, to 
consult upon it with Edgar, the ingenuousness of her nature urged her 
irresistibly to say, 'Since all this has passed, my dearest Father—my dearest 
Mother—does it not seem as if I should now myself——'

She stopt; but she was understood; they both smiled, and Mr. Tyrold immediately 
bringing in Edgar, said, 'I find my pardon, my dear fellow-culprit, is already 
accorded; if you have doubts of your own, try your eloquence for yourself.'

He left the room, and Mrs. Tyrold was gently rising to quietly follow, but 
Camilla, with a look of entreaty of which she knew the sincerity, and would not 
resist the earnestness, detained her.

'Ah yes, stay, dearest Madam!' cried Edgar, again respectfully taking her hand, 
'and through your unalterable goodness, let me hope to procure pardon for a 
distrust which I here for ever renounce; but which had its origin in my never 
daring to hope what, at this moment, I have the felicity to believe. Yet now, 
even now, without your kind mediation, this dear convalescent may plan some 
probationary trial at which my whole mind, after this long suffering, revolts. 
Will you be my caution, my dearest Mrs. Tyrold? Will you venture—and will you 
deign to promise, that if a full and generous forgiveness may be pronounced....'

'Forgiveness?' in a soft voice interrupted Camilla: 'Have I any thing to 
forgive? I thought all apology—all explanation, rested on my part? and that 
my imprudencies—my rashness—my so often-erring judgment ... and so 
apparently, almost even culpable conduct....'

'O, my Camilla! my now own Camilla!' cried Edgar, venturing to change the hand 
of the Mother for that of the daughter; 'what too, too touching words and 
concessions are these! Suffer me, then, to hope a kind amnesty may take place 
of retrospection, a clear, liberal, open forgiveness anticipate explanation and 
enquiry?'

'Are you sure,' said Camilla, smiling, 'this is your interest, and not mine?... 
Does he not make a mistake, my dearest Mother, and turn my advocate, instead of 
his own? And can I fairly take advantage of such an errour.'

The sun-shine of her returning smiles went warm to her Mother's heart, and gave 
a glow to the cheeks of Edgar, and a brightness to his eyes that irradiated his 
whole countenance. 'Your penetrating judgment,' said he, to Mrs. Tyrold, 'will 
take in at once more than any professions, any protestations can urge for me: 
... you see the peace, the pardon which those eyes do not seek to withhold ... 
will you then venture, my more than maternal friend! my Mother, in every 
meaning which affection and reverence can give to that revered 
appellation—will you venture at once—now—upon this dear and ever after 
hallowed minute—to seal the kind consent of my truly paternal guardian, and 
to give me an example of that trust and confidence which my whole future life 
shall look upon as its lesson?'

'Yes!' answered Mrs. Tyrold, instantly joining their hands, 'and with every 
security that the happiness of all our lives—my child's, my husband's, 
your's, my valued Edgar's, and my own, will all owe their felicity to the 
blessing with which I now lay my hands upon my two precious children!'

Tears were the only language that could express the fulness of joy which 
succeeded to so much sorrow; and when Mr. Tyrold returned, and had united his 
tenderest benediction with that of his beloved wife, Edgar was permitted to 
remain alone with Camilla; and the close of his long doubts, and her own long 
perplexities, was a reciprocal confidence that left nothing untold, not an 
action unrelated, not even a thought unacknowledged.

Edgar confessed that he no sooner had quitted her, than he suspected the 
justice of his decision; the turn which of late, he had taken, doubtfully to 
watch her every action, and suspiciously to judge her every motive, though it 
had impelled him in her presence, ceased to operate in her absence.—He was 
too noble to betray the well meant, though not well applied warnings of Dr. 
Marchmont, yet he acknowledged, that when left to cool reflection, a thousand 
palliations arose for every step he could not positively vindicate: and when, 
afterwards, from the frank communication of Lionel, he learnt what belonged to 
the mysterious offer of Sir Sedley Clarendel, that she would superintend the 
disposal of his fortune, and the deep obligation in which she had been 
innocently involved, his heart smote him for having judged ere he had 
investigated that transaction; and in a perturbation unspeakable of quick 
repentance, and tenderness, he set out for England. But when, at the 
half-way-house, he stopt as usual to rest his horses in his way to Beech 
Park,—what were his emotions at the sight of the locket, which the landlady 
told him had been pledged by a lady in distress! He besought her pardon for the 
manner in which he had made way to her; but the almost frantic anxiety which 
seized him to know if or not it was [she], and to save her, if so, from the 
intended intrusion of the landlord, made him irresistibly prefer it to the 
plainer mode which he should have adopted with any one else, of sending in his 
name, and some message. His shock at her view in such a state, he would not now 
revive; but the impropriety of bidding the landlady quit the chamber, and the 
impossibility of entering into an explanation in her hearing, alone repressed, 
at that agitated moment, the avowal of every sensation with which his heart was 
labouring. 'But when,' he added, 'shall I cease to rejoice that I had listened 
to the good landlady's history of a sick guest, while all conjecture was so 
remote from whom it might be! when I am tempted to turn aside from a tale of 
distress, I will recollect what I owe to having given [ear to one]!' Lost in 
wonder at what could have brought her to such a situation, and disturbed how to 
present himself at the rectory, till fixed in his plans, he had ridden to the 
half-way-house that morning, to enquire concerning the corpse that Mrs. Marl 
had mentioned—and there—while he was speaking with her, the little maid 
brought down two letters—one of them directed to himself.—

'What a rapid transition,' cried he, 'was then mine, from regrets that robbed 
life of all charms, to prospects which paint it in its most vivid colours of 
happiness! from wavering the most deplorable, to resolutions of expiating by a 
whole life of devoted fondness, the barbarous waywardness that could deprive 
me, for one wilful moment, of the exquisite felicity of my lot!...'

'But still,' said Camilla, 'I do not quite understand how you came in that room 
this morning? and how you authorized yourself to overhear my confessions to my 
Mother?'

'Recollect my acknowledged accomplice before you hazard any blame! When I came 
hither ... somewhat, I confess, within my given hour, Mr. Tyrold received me 
himself at the door. He told me I was too soon, and took me into the front 
parlour. The partition is thin. I heard my name spoken by Mrs. Tyrold, and the 
gentle voice of my Camilla, in accents yet more gentle than even that voice 
ever spoke before, answering some question; I was not myself, at first, aware 
of its tenour ... but when, unavoidably, I gathered it ... when I heard words 
so beautifully harmonizing with what I had so lately perused—I would 
instantly have ventured into the room; but Mr. Tyrold feared surprising 
you—you went on—my fascinated soul divested me of obedience—of 
caution—of all but joy and gratitude ... and he could no longer restrain me. 
And now with which of her offenders will my Camilla quarrel?'

'With neither, I believe, just at present. The conspiracy is so complex, and 
even my Mother so nearly a party concerned, that I dare not risk the unequal 
contest. I must only, in future,' added she smiling, 'speak ill of you ... and 
then you will find less pleasure in the thinness of a partition!'

Faithfully she returned his communication, by the fullest, most candid, and 
unsparing account of every transaction of her short life, from the still 
shorter period of its being put into voluntary motion. With nearly breathless 
interest, he listened to the detail of her transactions with Sir Sedley 
Clarendel, with pity to her debts, and with horrour to her difficulties. But 
when, through the whole ingenuous narration, he found himself the constant 
object of every view, the ultimate motive to every action, even where least it 
appeared, his happiness, and his gratitude, made Camilla soon forget that 
sorrow had ever been known to her.

They then spoke of her two favourites, Mrs. Arlbery, and Mrs. Berlinton; and 
though she was animated in her praise of the good qualities of the first, and 
the sweet attraction of the last, she confessed the danger, for one so new in 
the world, of chusing friends distinct from those of her family; and 
voluntarily promised, during her present season of inexperience, to repose the 
future choice of her connections, where she could never be happy without their 
approvance.

The two hundred pounds to Sir Sedley Clarendel, he determined, on the very day 
that Camilla should be his, to return to the Baronet, under the privilege, and 
in the name of paying it for a brother.

In conference thus softly balsamic to every past wound, and thus deliciously 
opening to that summit of earthly felicity ... confidence unlimited entwined 
around affection unbounded ... hours might have passed, unnumbered and 
unawares, had not prudence forced a separation, for the repose of Camilla.
