
The last Touches of the Picture

Late as Edgar quitted the rectory, he went not straight to Beech Park; every 
tie both of friendship and propriety carried him first to Dr. Marchmont; who 
had too much feeling to wonder at the power of his late incitements, and too 
much goodness of heart not to felicitate him upon their issue, though he sighed 
at the recollection of the disappointments whence his own doubting counsel 
originated. Twice betrayed in his dearest expectations, he had formed two 
criterions from his peculiar experience, by which he had settled his opinion of 
the whole female sex; and where opinion may humour systematic prepossession, 
who shall build upon his virtue or wisdom to guard the transparency of his 
impartiality?

The following day, the Westwyns presented themselves at Etherington; hurried 
from a tour they were taking through Devonshire and Cornwall, by intelligence 
which had reached them that Sir Hugh Tyrold was ruined, and Cleves was to be 
let. They met, by chance, with Edgar alone in the parlour; and the joy of the 
old gentleman in hearing how small a part of the rumour was founded in fact, 
made him shake hands with him as cordially for setting him right, as Edgar 
welcomed his kindness, from the pleasure afforded by the sight of such 
primitive regard. But when, presuming upon his peculiar intimacy in the family, 
as ward of Mr. Tyrold, though without yet daring to avow his approaching nearer 
affinity, Edgar insisted upon his superior claim for supplanting them in taking 
charge of the debt of his guardian; Mr. Westwyn, almost angrily, protested he 
would let no man upon earth, let him be whose ward he pleased, shew more 
respect than himself for the brother of Sir Hugh Tyrold; 'And Hal thinks the 
same too,' he added, 'or he's no son of mine. And so he'll soon shew you, in a 
way you can't guess, I give you my word. At least that's my opinion.'

He then took his son apart, and abruptly whispered to him, 'As that pretty girl 
you and I took such a fancy to, at Southton, served us in that shabby manner, 
because of meeting with that old Lord, it's my opinion you'd do the right thing 
to take her sister; who's pretty near as pretty, and gives herself no airs; and 
that will be shewing respect for my worthy old friend, now he's down in the 
world; which is exactly that he did for me when I was down myself. For if he 
had not lent me that thousand pounds I told you of, when not a relation I had 
would lend me a hundred, I might have been ruined before ever you were born. 
Come, tell me your mind Hal! off or on? don't stand shilly shally; it's what I 
can't bear; speak honestly; I won't have your choice controlled; only this one 
thing I must tell you without ceremony, I shall never think well of you again 
as long as ever I live, if you demur so much as a moment. It's what I can't 
bear; it i'n't doing a thing handsomely. I can't say I like it.'

The appearance of Lavinia relieved the immediate embarrassment of Henry, while 
the modest pleasure with which she received them confirmed the partiality of 
both. The eagerness, however, of the father, admitted of no delay, and when Sir 
Hugh entered the room, the son's assent being obtained, he warmly demanded the 
fair Lavinia for his daughter-in-law.

Sir Hugh received the proposition with the most copious satisfaction; Mr. and 
Mrs. Tyrold with equal, though more anxious delight; and Lavinia herself with 
blushing but unaffected hopes of happiness.

Whatever was known to Sir Hugh, no cautions, nor even his own best designs, 
could save from being known to the whole house. Eugenia, therefore, was 
unavoidably informed of this transaction; and the generous pleasure with which 
she revived from the almost settled melancholy left upon her, by continual 
misfortunes, justified the impatience of Edgar to accelerate the allowed period 
for publishing his own happy history.

Eugenia wept with joy at tidings so precious of her beloved sister, through 
whom, and her other dear friends, she was alone, she said, susceptible of joy, 
though to all sorrow she henceforth bid adieu, 'For henceforth,' she cried, 'I 
mean to regard myself as if already I had passed the busy period of youth and 
of life, and were only a spectatress of others. For this purpose, I have begun 
writing my memoirs, which will amuse my solitude, and confirm my—I hope, 
philosophical idea.'

She then produced the opening of her intended book.

SECTION I.

'No blooming coquette, elated with adulation and triumphant with conquest, here 
counts the glories of her eyes, or enumerates the train of her adorers: no 
beauteous prude, repines at the fatigue of admiration, nor bewails the 
necessity of tyranny: O gentle reader! you have the story of one from whom fate 
has withheld all the delicacy of vanity, all the regale of cruelty—!'

'Here,' interrupted the young biographer, 'will follow my portrait, and then 
this further address to my readers.'

'O ye, who, young and fair, revel in the attractions of beauty, and exult in 
the pride of admiration, say, where is your envy of the heiress to whom fortune 
comes with such alloys? And which, however distressed or impoverished, would 
accept my income with my personal defects?

'Ye, too, O lords of the creation, mighty men! impute not to native vanity the 
repining spirit with which I lament the loss of beauty; attribute not to the 
innate weakness of my sex, the concern I confess for my deformity; nor to 
feminine littleness of soul, a regret of which the true source is to be traced 
to your own bosoms, and springs from your own tastes: for the value you 
yourselves set upon external attractions, your own neglect has taught me to 
know; and the indifferency with which you consider all else, your own duplicity 
has instructed me to feel.'

Camilla sought to dissuade her from reflexions so afflictive, and 
retrospections so poignant; but they aided her, she said, in her task of 
acquiring composure for the regulation of her future life.

Edgar now received permission to make his communication to the Baronet.

The joy with which Sir Hugh heard it, was for some time over-clouded by doubt. 
'My dear Mr. young Edgar,' he said, 'in case you don't know your own mind yet, 
in the point of its not changing again, as it did before, I'd as leave you 
would not tell me of it till you've taken the proper time to be at a certainty; 
frettings about these ups and downs, being what do no good to me, in point of 
the gout.'

But when thoroughly re-assured, 'Well,' he cried, 'this is just the thing I 
should have chose out of all our misfortunes, being what makes me happier than 
ever I was in my life; except once before on the very same account, which all 
turned out to end in nothing: which, I hope, won't happen any more: for now 
I've only to pay off all our debts, and then I may go back again to Cleves, 
which I shall be glad enough to do, it being but an awkward thing to a man, 
after he's past boyhood, having no home of his own.'

A sigh at the recollection of the change in his situation, since his plan was 
last agitated, checked his felicity, and depressed even that of Edgar, who, 
with the most tender earnestness, besought his leave to advance the sum 
requisite to return him tranquilly to his mansion; but who could not prevail, 
till Camilla joined in the petition, and permitted Edgar, in both their names 
to entreat, as their dearest wish, that they might be united, according to the 
first arrangement, from Cleves.

This the Baronet could not resist, and preparations were rapidly made for 
re-instating him in his dwelling, and for the double marriages destined to take 
place upon his return.

'Well, then, this,' cried he, as he poured upon them his tenderest blessings 
and caresses, 'is the oddest of all! My dear little Camilla, that I took all my 
fortune from, is the very person to give me hers as soon as ever she gets it! 
as well as my own house over my old head again, after my turning her, as one 
may say, out of it! which is a thing as curious, in point of us poor ignorant 
mortals, as if my brother had put it in a sermon.'

'Such turns in the tide of fortune,' said Mr. Tyrold, 'are amongst the happiest 
lessons of humanity, where those who have served the humble and helpless from 
motives of pure disinterestedness, find they have made useful friends for 
themselves, in the perpetual vicissitudes of our unstable condition.'

'Why, then, there's but one thing more, by what I can make out,' said the 
Baronet, 'that need be much upon my mind, and that I've been thinking some time 
about, in point of forming a scheme to get rid of, which I think I've got a 
pretty good one: for here's Lavinia going to be married to the very oldest 
friend I have in the world; that is, to his son, which is the same thing in 
point of bringing us all together; and my own dear little girl, to the best 
gentleman in the county, except for that one thing of going off at the first, 
which I dare say he did not mean, for which reason I shall mention it no more: 
and Indiana, to one of those young captains, that I can't pretend I know much 
of; but that's very excusable in so young a person, not having had much head 
from the beginning; which I always make allowance for; my own not being over 
extraordinary: and Eugenia, poor thing, being a widow already; for which God be 
praised; which I hope is no sin, in point of the poor lad that's gone not 
belonging to any of us, by what I can make out, except by his own doing whether 
we would or not; which, however, is neither here nor there, now he's gone; for 
Eugenia being no beauty, and Clermont having as good as said so, I suppose she 
thought she must not be too difficult; which is a thing young girls are apt to 
fall into; and boys too, for the matter of that; for, by what I can make out of 
life, I don't see but what a scholar thinks a girl had better be pretty than 
not, as much as another man.'

'But what, my dear brother,' said Mr. Tyrold, 'is your new distress and new 
scheme?'

'Why I can't say but what I'm a little put out, that Indiana should forget poor 
Mrs. Margland, in the particular of asking her to go to live with her; which, 
however, I dare say she can't help, those young captains commonly not over 
liking having elderly persons about them; not that I mean to guess her age, 
which I take to be fifty, and upwards; which is no point of ours. But the thing 
I'm thinking of is Dr. Orkborne, in the case of their marrying one another.'

'My dear brother!... has any such idea occurred to them?'

'Not as I know of; but Indiana having done with one, and Eugenia with the 
other, and me, Lord help me! not wanting either of them, why what can I do if 
they won't? the Doctor's asked to go to town, for the sake of printing his 
papers, which I begged him not to hurry, for I'm but little fit for learned 
conversation just now; though when he's here, he commonly says nothing; only 
taking out his tablets to write down something that comes into his head, as I 
suppose: which I can't say is very entertaining in the light of a companion. 
However, as to his having called me a blockhead, it's not what I take umbrage 
at, not being a wit being a fault of no man's, except of nature, which nobody 
has a right to be angry at. Besides, as to his having a little pride, it's what 
I owe him no ill-will for; a scholar having nothing else but his learning, is 
excusable for making the most of it. However, if they would marry one another, 
I can't but say I should take it very well of them. The only thing I know 
against it, is the mortal dislike they have to one another: and that, my dear 
brother, is the point I want to consult you about; for then we shall be got off 
all round: which would be a great thing off my mind.'

When the happy day arrived for returning to Cleves, Sir Hugh re-took possession 
of his hospitable mansion, amidst the tenderest felicitations of his fond 
family, and the almost clamorous rejoicings of the assembled poor of the 
neighbourhood: and the following morning, Mr. Tyrold gave the hand of Lavinia 
to Harry Westwyn, and Dr. Marchmont united them; and Edgar, glowing with 
happiness, now purified from any alloy, received from the same revered hand, 
and owed to the same honoured voice, the final and lasting possession of the 
tearful, but happy Camilla.

What further remains to finish this small sketch of a Picture of Youth, may be 
comprised in a few pages.

Indiana was more fortunate in her northern expedition, than experiments of that 
nature commonly prove. Macdersey was a man of honour, and possessed better 
claims to her than he had either language or skill to explain: but the good 
Lord O'Lerney, who, to benevolence the most cheerful, and keenness the least 
severe, joined judgment and generosity, acted as the guardian of his kinsman, 
and placed the young couple in competence and comfort.

The profession of Macdersey obliging him to sojourn frequently in country 
quarters, Indiana, when the first novelty of tête-à-têtes was over, wished 
again for the constant adulatress of her charms and endowments, and, to the 
inexpressible rapture of Sir Hugh, solicited Miss Margland to be her companion: 
and the influence of constant flattery was so seductive to her weak mind, that, 
though insensible to the higher motive of cherishing her in remembrance of her 
long cares, she was so spoilt by her blandishments, and so accustomed to her 
management, that she parted from her no more.

Lavinia, with her deserving partner, spent a month between Cleves and 
Etherington, and then accompanied him and his fond father to their Yorkshire 
estate and residence. Like all characters of radical worth, she grew daily upon 
the esteem and affection of her new family, and found in her husband as marked 
a contrast with Clermont Lynmere, to annul all Hypothesis of Education, as Lord 
O'Lerney, cool, rational, and penetrating, opposed to Macdersey, wild, 
eccentric, and vehement, offered against all that is National. Brought up under 
the same tutor, the same masters, and at the same university, with equal care, 
equal expence, equal opportunities of every kind, Clermont turned out 
conceited, voluptuous, and shallow; Henry modest, full of feeling, and stored 
with intelligence.

Lionel, first enraged, but next tamed, by the disinheritance which he had drawn 
upon himself, had ample subject in his disappointment to keep alive his 
repentance. And though enabled to return from banishment, by the ignominious 
condemnation, with another culprit, of the late partner in his guilt, he felt 
so lowered from his fallen prospects, and so gloomy from his altered spirits, 
that when his parents, satisfied with his punishment, held out the olive-branch 
to invite him home, he came forth again rather as if condemned, than forgiven; 
and, wholly wanting fortitude either to see or to avoid his former associates, 
he procured an appointment that carried him abroad, where his friends induced 
him to remain, till his bad habits, as well as bad connections, were forgotten, 
and time aided adversity in forming him a new character.

Clermont, for whom his uncle bought a commission, fixed himself in the army; 
though with no greater love of his country, than was appendant to the 
opportunity it afforded of shewing his fine person to regimental advantage.

Mrs. Arlbery was amongst the first to hasten with congratulations to Camilla. 
With too much understanding to betray her pique upon the errour of her 
judgment, as to the means of attaching Mandlebert, she had too much goodness of 
heart not to rejoice in the happiness of her young friend.

Mrs. Lissin, who accompanied her in the wedding visit, confessed herself the 
most disappointed and distressed of human beings. She had not, she said, half 
so much liberty as when she lived with her Papa, and heartily repented 
marrying, and wished she had never thought of it. The servants were always 
teazing her for orders and directions; every thing that went wrong, it was 
always she who was asked why it was not right; when she wanted to be driving 
about all day, the coachman always said it was too much for the horses; when 
she travelled, the maids always asked her what must be packed up; if she 
happened to be out at dinner time, Mr. Lissin found fault with every thing's 
being cold: if she wanted to do something she liked, he said she had better let 
it alone; and, in fine, her violent desire for this state of freedom, ended in 
conceiving it a state of bondage; she found her own house the house of which 
she must take the charge; being her own mistress, having the burthen of 
superintending a whole family, and being married, becoming the property of 
another, to whom she made over a legal right to treat her just as he pleased. 
And as she had chosen neither for character, nor for disposition, neither from 
sympathy nor respect, she found it hard to submit where she meant to become 
independent, and difficult to take the cares where she had made no provision 
for the solaces of domestic life.

The notable Mrs. Mittin contrived soon to so usefully ingratiate herself in the 
favour of Mr. Dennel, that, in the full persuasion she would save him half his 
annual expences, he married her: but her friend, Mr. Clykes, was robbed in his 
journey home of the cash which he had so dishonourably gained.

The first care of Edgar was to clear every debt in which Camilla had borne any 
share, and then to make over to Lavinia the little portion intended to be 
parted between the sisters. Henry would have resisted; but Mr. Tyrold knew the 
fortune of Edgar to be fully adequate to his generosity, and sustained the 
proposition. Sir Sedley Clarendel received his two hundred pounds without 
opposition, though with surprise; and was dubious whether to rejoice in the 
shackles he had escaped, or to lament the charmer he had lost.

Sir Hugh would suffer no one but himself to clear the debts of his two nephews, 
or refund what had been advanced by his excellent old friend Mr. Westwyn. He 
called back all his servants, liberally recompensed their marked attachment, 
provided particularly for good old Jacob; and took upon himself the most ample 
reward for the postillion who meant to rescue Eugenia.

The prisoner and his wife, now worthy established cottagers, were the first, at 
the entrance of Beech Park, to welcome the bride and bridegroom; and little 
Peggy Higden was sent for immediately, and placed, with extremest kindness, 
where she might rise in use and in profit.

Lord O'Lerney was sedulously sought by Edgar, who had the infinite happiness to 
see Camilla a selected friend of Lady Isabella Irby, whose benevolent care of 
her in the season of her utter distress, had softly enchained her tenderest 
gratitude, and had excited in himself an almost adoring respect.

Melmond had received in time the caution of Camilla, to prevent the meeting to 
which the baseness of Bellamy was deluding his misguided sister, through her 
own wild theories. He forbore to blast her fame by calling him publicly to 
account; and ere further arts could be practised, Bellamy was no more.

Mrs. Berlinton, in the shock of sudden sorrow, shut herself up from the world. 
Claims of debts of honour, which she had no means to answer, pursued her in her 
retreat; she became at once the prey of grief, repentance, and shame; and her 
mind was yet young enough in wrong, to be penetrated by the early chastisement 
of calamity. Removed from the whirl of pleasure, which takes reflexion from 
action, and feeling from thought, she reviewed, with poignant contrition, her 
graceless misconduct with regard to Eugenia, detested her infatuation, and 
humbled herself to implore forgiveness. Her aunt seized the agitating moment of 
self-upbraiding and worldly disgust, to impress upon her fears the lessons of 
her opening life: and thus, repulsed from passion, and sickened of dissipation, 
though too illiberally instructed for cheerful and rational piety, she was 
happily snatched from utter ruin by protecting, though eccentric enthusiasm.

Eugenia, for some time, continued in voluntary seclusion, happily reaping from 
the fruits of her education and her virtues, resources and reflexions for 
retirement, that robbed it of weariness. The name, the recollection of Bellamy, 
always made her shudder, but the peace of perfect innocence was soon restored 
to her mind. The sufferings of Mrs. Berlinton from self-reproach, taught her 
yet more fully to value the felicity of blamelessness; and the generous 
liberality of her character, made the first inducement she felt for exertion, 
the benevolence of giving solace to a penitent who had injured her.

Melmond, long conscious of her worth, and disgusted with all that had rivalled 
it in his mind, with the fervour of sincerity, yet diffidence of shame and 
regret, now fearfully sought the favour he before had reluctantly received. But 
Eugenia retreated. She had no courage for a new engagement, no faith for new 
vows, no hope for new happiness: till his really exemplary character, with the 
sympathy of his feelings, and the similarity of his taste and turn of mind with 
her own, made the Tyrolds, when they perceived his ascendance, second his 
wishes. Approbation so sacred, joined to a prepossession so tender, soon 
conquered every timid difficulty in the ingenuous Eugenia; who in his 
well-earnt esteem, and grateful affection, received, at length, the recompence 
of every exerted virtue, and the solace of every past suffering. Melmond, in a 
companion delighting in all his favourite pursuits, and capable of joining even 
in his severer studies, found a charm to beguile from him all former regret, 
while reason and experience endeared his ultimate choice. Eugenia once loved, 
was loved for ever. Where her countenance was looked at, her complexion was 
forgotten; while her voice was heard, her figure was unobserved; where her 
virtues were known, they seemed but to be enhanced by her personal misfortunes.

The Baronet was enchanted to see her thus unexpectedly happy, and soon 
transferred to Melmond the classical respect which Clermont had forfeited, when 
he concurred with Eugenia in a petition, that Dr. Orkborne, without further 
delay, might be enabled to retire to his own plans and pursuits, with such just 
and honourable consideration for labours he well knew how to appreciate, as his 
friend Mr. Tyrold should judge to be worthy of his acceptance.

With joy expanding to that thankfulness which may be called the beauty of 
piety, the virtuous Tyrolds, as their first blessings, received these blessings 
of their children: and the beneficent Sir Hugh felt every wish so satisfied, he 
could scarcely occupy himself again with a project ... save a maxim of 
prudence, drawn from his own experience, which he daily planned teaching to the 
little generation rising around him; To avoid, from the disasters of their 
Uncle, the Dangers and Temptations, to their Descendants, of Unsettled 
Collateral Expectations.

Thus ended the long conflicts, doubts, suspences, and sufferings of Edgar and 
Camilla; who, without one inevitable calamity, one unavoidable distress, so 
nearly fell the sacrifice to the two extremes of Imprudence, and Suspicion, to 
the natural heedlessness of youth unguided, or to the acquired distrust of 
experience that had been wounded. Edgar, by generous confidence, became the 
repository of her every thought; and her friends read her exquisite lot in a 
gaiety no longer to be feared: while, faithful to his word, making Etherington, 
Cleves, and Beech Park, his alternate dwellings, he rarely parted her from her 
fond Parents and enraptured Uncle. And Dr. Marchmont, as he saw the pure 
innocence, open frankness, and spotless honour of her heart, found her virtues, 
her errours, her facility, or her desperation, but A PICTURE OF YOUTH; and 
regretting the false light given by the spirit of comparison, in the hypothesis 
which he had formed from individual experience, acknowledged its injustice, its 
narrowness, and its arrogance. What, at last, so diversified as man? what so 
little to be judged by his fellow?

FINIS
