Battle as can possibly be fought, without the Assistance of Steel or cold Iron.
p. 257 CHAP. XII. In which is seen a more moving Spectacle, than all the Blood
in the Bodies of Thwackum and Bliffil, and of twenty other such, is capable of
producing. p. 261
BOOK VI. Containing about three Weeks.
CHAP. I. Of Love. p. 268 CHAP. II. The Character of Mrs. Western. Her great
Learning and Knowledge of the World, and an Instance of the deep Penetretion
which she derived from those Advantages. p. 272 CHAP. III. Containing two
Defiances to the Critics. p. 279 CHAP. IV. Containing sundry curious Matters.
p. 284 CHAP. V. In which is related what passed between Sophia and her Aunt. p.
287 CHAP. VI. Containing a Dialogue between Sophia and Mrs. Honor, which may a
little relieve those tender Affections which the foregoing Scene may have
raised in the Mind of a good-natured Reader. p. 292 CHAP. VII. A Picture of
formal Courtship in Miniature, as it always ought to be drawn, and a Scene of a
tenderer Kind, painted at full Length. p. 296 CHAP. VIII. The Meeting between
Jones and Sophia. p. 301 CHAP. IX. Being of a much more tempestuous Kind than
the former, p. 304 CHAP. X. In which Mr. Western Visits Mr. Allworthy. p. 310
CHAP. XI. A short Chapter; but which contains sufficient Matter to affect the
good-natured Reader. p, 315 CHAP. XII. Containing Love Letters, etc. p. 318
CHAP. XIII. The Behavior of Sophia on the present Occasion: which none of her
Sex will blame, who are capable of behaving in the same Manner. And the
Discussion of a knotty Point in the Court of Conscience. p. 323 CHAP. XIV. A
short Chapter, containing a short Dialogue between Squire Western and his
Sister. p, 328
THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK I.
Containing as much of the Birth of the Foundling as is necessary or proper to
acquaint the Reader with in the Beginning of this History.

CHAP I.
The Introduction to the Work, or Bill of Fare to the Feast.

AN Author ought to consider himself, not as a Gentleman who gives a private or
eleemosynary Treat, but rather as one who keeps a public Ordinary, at which
all Persons are welcome for their Money. In the former Case, it is well known,
that the Entertainer provides what Fare he pleases; and though this should be
very indifferent, and utterly disagreeable to the Taste of his Company, they
must not find any Fault; nay, on the contrary, Good-Breeding forces them
outwardly to approve and to commend whatever is set before them. Now the
contrary of this happens to the Master of an Ordinary. Men who pay for what
they eat, will insist on gratifying their Palates, however nice and even
whimsical these may prove; and if every Thing is not agreeable to their Taste,
will challenge a Right to censure, to abuse, and to d -- m their Dinner without
control.

To prevent therefore giving Offense to their Customers by any such
Disappointment, it has been usual, with the honest and well-meaning Host, to
provide a Bill of Fare, which all Persons may peruse at their first Entrance
into the House; and, having thence acquainted themselves with the Entertainment
which they may expect, may either stay and regale with what is provided for
them, or may depart to some other Ordinary better accommodated to their Taste.

As we do not disdain to borrow Wit or Wisdom from any Man who is capable of
lending us either, we have condescended to take a Hint from these honest
Victuallers, and shall prefix not only a general Bill of Fare to our whole
Entertainment, but shall likewise give the Reader particular Bills to every
Course which is to be served up in this and the ensuing Volumes.

The Provision then which we have here made is no other than HUMAN NATURE. Nor
do I fear that my sensible Reader, though most luxurious in his Taste, will
start, cavil, or be offended, because I have named but one Article. The
Tortoise, as the Alderman of Bristol, well learned in eating, knows by much
Experience, besides the delicious Calibash and Calipee, contains many different
Kinds of Food; nor can the learned Reader be ignorant, that in Human Nature,
though here collected under one general Name, is such prodigious Variety, that a
Cook will have sooner gone through all the several Species of animal and
vegetable Food in the World, than an Author will be able to exhaust so
extensive a Subject.

An Objection may perhaps be apprehended from the more delicate, that this Dish
is too common and Vulgar; for what else is the Subject of all Romances, Novels,
Plays and Poems, with which the Stalls abound. Many exquisite Viands might be
rejected by the Epicure, if it was a sufficient Cause for his contemning of
them as common and vulgar, that something was to be found in the most paultry
Alleys under the same Name. In reality, true Nature is as difficult to be met
with in Authors, as the Bayonne Ham or Bologna Sausage is to be found in the
Shops.

But the whole, to continue the same Metaphor, consists in the Cookery of the
Author; for, as Mr. Pope tells us,

True Wit is Nature to Advantage dressed,
What often was thought, but never so well expressed.
The same Animal which has the Honor to have some Part of his Flesh eaten at
the Table of a Duke, may perhaps be degraded in another Part, and some of his
Limbs gibbeted, as it were, in the vilest Stall in Town. Where then lies the
Difference between the Food of the Nobleman and the Porter, if both were at
Dinner on the same Ox or Calf, but in the seasoning, the dressing, the
garnishing, and the setting forth. Hence the one provokes and incites the most
languid Appetite, and the other turns and palls that which is the sharpest and
keenest.

In like manner, the Excellence of the mental Entertainment consists less in
the Subject, than in the Author's Skill in dressing it up. How pleased
therefore will the Reader be to find, that we have, in the following Work,
adhered closely to one of the highest Principles of the best Cook which the
present Age, or perhaps that of Heliogabalus, has produced. This great Man, as
is well known to all polite Lovers of eating, begins at first by setting plain
Things before his hungry Guests, rising afterward by Degrees, as their
Stomachs may be supposed to decrease, to the very Quintessence of Sauce and
Spices. In like manner, we shall represent Human Nature at first to the keen
Appetite of our Reader, in that more plain and simple Manner in which it is
found in the Country, and shall hereafter hash and ragoo it with all the high
French and Italian Seasoning of Affectation and Vice which Courts and Cities
afford. By these Means, we doubt not but our Reader may be rendered desirous to
read on for ever, as the great Person, just abovementioned, is supposed to have
made some Persons eat.

Having premised thus much, we will now detain those, who like our Bill of
Fare, no longer from our Diet, and shall proceed directly to serve up the first
Course of our History, for their Entertainment.

CHAP. II.
A short Description of 'Squire Allworthy, and a fuller Account of Miss Bridget
Allworthy his Sister.

IN that Part of the Western Division of this Kingdom, which is commonly called
Somersetshire, ther^ lately lived (and perhaps lives still) a Gentleman whose
Name was Allworthy, and who might well be called the Favorite of both Nature
and Fortune; for both of these seem to have contended which should bless and
enrich him most. In this Contention, Nature may seem to some to have come off
victorious, as she bestowed on him many Gifts; while Fortune had only one Gift
in her Power; but in pouring forth this, she was so very profuse, that others
perhaps may think this single Endowment to have been more than equivalent to
all the various Blessings which he enjoyed from Nature. From the former of
these, he derived an agreeable Person, a sound Constitution, a solid
Understanding, and a benevolent Heart; by the latter, he was decreed to the
Inheritance of one of the largest Estates in the County.

This Gentleman had, in his Youth, married a very worthy and beautiful Woman,
of whom he had been extremely fond: By her he had three Children, all of whom
died in their Infancy. He had likewise had the Misfortune of burying this
beloved Wife herself, about five Years before the Time in which this History
chooses to set out. This Loss, however great, he bore like a Man of Sense and
Constancy; though it must be confessed, he would often talk a little whimsically on
this Head: For he sometimes said, he looked on himself still as married, and
considered his Wife as only gone a little before him, a Journey which he should
most certainly, sooner or later, take after her; and that he had not the least
Doubt of meeting her again, in a Place where he should never part with her
more. Sentiments for which his Sense was arraigned by one Part of his
Neighbors, his Religion by a second, and his Sincerity by a third.

He now lived, for the most Part, retired in the Country, with one Sister, for
whom he had a very tender Affection. This Lady was now somewhat past the Age of
30, an Era, at which, in the Opinion of the malicious, the Title of Old Maid
may, with no Impropriety, be assumed. She was of that Species of Women, whom
you rather commend for good Qualities than Beauty, and who are generally called
by their own Sex, very good Sort of Women -- as good a Sort of Woman, Madam, as
you would wish to know. Indeed she was so far from regretting Want of Beauty,
that she never mentioned that Perfection (if it can be called one) without
Contempt; and would often thank God she was not as handsome as Miss such a one,
whom perhaps Beauty had led into Errors, which she might have otherwise
avoided. Miss Bridget Allworthy (for that was the Name of this Lady) very
rightly conceived the Charms of Person in a Woman to be no better than Snares
for herself, as well as for others, and yet so discreet was she in her Conduct,
that her Prudence was as much on the Guard, as if she had had all the Snares to
apprehend which were ever laid for her whole Sex. Indeed, I have observed (though
it may seem unaccountable to the Reader) that this Guard of Prudence, like the
Trained Bands, is always readiest to go on Duty where there is the least
Danger. It often basely and cowardly deserts those Paragons for whom the Men
are all wishing, sighing, dying, and spreading every Net in their Power; and
constantly attends at the Heels of that higher Order of Women, for whom the
other Sex have a more distant and awful Respect, and whom, (from Despair, I
suppose, of Success) they never venture to attack.

Reader, I think proper, before we proceed any farther together, to acquaint
thee, that I intend to digress, through this whole History, as often as I see
Occasion: Of which I am myself a better Judge than any pitiful Critic whatever;
and here I must desire all those Critics to mind their own Business, and not to
intermeddle with Affairs, or Works, which no ways concern them: For, till they
produce the Authority by which they are constituted Judges, I shall plead to
their Jurisdiction.

CHAP. III.
An odd Accident which befell Mr. Allworthy, at his Return home. The decent
Behavior of Mrs. Deborah Wilkins, with some proper Animadversions on Bastards.
