MISS Wildman having opened herself so much to her maid respecting me, and
which, he conceiving could said only with a view of my hearing it again, I took
an opportunity one morning, when she came into Charlotte's room, to request her
private ear for five minutes. With great and amiable goodnature, she sent her
maid into her room to adjust her toilet, when I addressed her in the following
manner. If it be not an act of the highest presumption, Madam, for one in my
humble station in life, to declare an attachment to a young lady of your rank
and fortune; if it be not an offense against propriety and duty, to solicit
your attention to any tale of mine; I would venture to represent to you, that
thought you see me here as your father's valet, I am a gentleman both by birth
and education, and am not a great way removed from a very considerable landed
property. There is an estate of four thousand pounds a year, in the family, and
my hopes of one day inheriting it, are not wild and romantic. I mention this
only to induce your favorable hearing. -- Mr. Gabriel, said she, interrupting
me, from the time I first saw you, I was convinced, that, though wearing a
livery, you had been bred to better expectations; -- but as you have been the
preserver of my honor, and have risked your life in my defense, whether
servant or master, you are equally entitled to my regard and gratitude. -- Talk
not of gratitude! my dear Miss Wildman, exclaimed I; for her sweet
condescension gave me greater confidence, talk not of gratitude; what I did,
was a duty due from my sex to yours, and if it merits your simple thanks, I am
over-paid. My humble character in life will not suffer me to make advances, but
should fortune, at any future period, put us nearer on an equality, may I hope
for something more than your regard? -- I am of too selfish a nature, returns
Miss Wildman, not to acknowledge, that were I mistress of worlds, you have
deserved them all. I have a heart, it is true, to give again, but what is my
poor heart without my hand? That is at my father's disposal; was it at my
command, I would enter further into the subject. A thousand blessings on you,
my dear Miss Wildman, for this generous declaration, cried I in rapture, taking
her hand, which she readily gave me, let me extort but one declaration more,
and, poor as I am, I shall be the happiest of men. Your good sense, Mr.
Gabriel, returned she, will, I am persuaded, prevent your urging me to say any
thing I ought not to say: what I am mistress of, you may command; what I have
not to give, you cannot expect. I have too high a veneration for you, my dear
Miss Wildman, replied I, still holding her by the hand, to urge the least
impropriety: you have frankly confessed your heart is still at liberty, but not
your hand; I ask not your hand at present, but solicit only your heart, and
that you will give me a chance, by time, of possessing the former; at least,
that you will promise me not to bestow the one, where you cannot yield the
other. This she solemnly promised; "her heart," she said, I had won, and it was
mine; she had only to lament that she could not give her hand as readily.
Charlotte that instant entering the room, she left me, but said she would take
the first opportunity of seeing me again

SHE kept her word the next morning, and brought me an enamelled ring, of no
great value in deed, otherwise than as a proof of having re-considered the
matter, and thus ratifying her determination. "Take, my dear Gabriel," says
she, this ring, as a pledge of my sincerity, that while you are living, as I
have thought proper to present you my heart, no man else shall have my hand. --
I take it, my dear Miss Wildman, returned I, pressing it with her hand to my
lips, as the best gift below, Heaven has to give; and if I prove unworthy of
the gift, may I never know bliss hereafter. I call you the most generous of
women, as the difference of my situation in life from yours, puts me at too
great a distance to have any expectations. Situation, my dear Gabriel, replied
she, is an idle term. On the footing of nature, we are all equal, and if there
are any circumstances in the eye of the world, that raise one person above
another, or distinguish individuals, it is a greater share of moral virtue, or
of mental or corporal endowments, given us by Providence and improved by art.
You have to boast of these, and of course, are far before half the gentlemen I
have the honor to know. In alliances for life, to secure a competency, without
which happiness is merely ideal, it may be necessary to consult interest and
pay some regard to fortune; but where there is sufficient property on one side
to ensure that competency, to look for it on the other, is mercenary and
covetous. My father is able to give me a fortune, adequate to my utmost wishes;
and whenever the time shall come, that I am in possession of that, or you be in
a situation not to want it, you shall command my hand, as you do now my heart.

THUS, in an endearing enjoyment of a reciprocity of affection, through the
confidence of Charlotte, and the convenience of her room, did many days glide
smoothly on. But after I had been in the family about six weeks; with a kind of
terror in her countenance, Miss Wildman brought me the following letter, which
she had received from Lord B.

Thou most cruel of women,
I have been long at loss to account for your indifference, but the cause I am
now acquainted with, that of having a rival among your father's servants. I
have too much pride to acquaint Mr. Wildman with the fact, but I shall watch
the scoundrel's motions and remove him from you."

Your injured B --.


I SMILED at the threat and requested her to make herself easy under it, for as
fear was no part of my composition, I should be always upon my guard; but, if
at any time, I was betrayed, by any of my fellow servants, and prevented a
night from sleeping at home, she should hear immediately from me. She assured
me, her alarm was not very great upon the occasion, as she conceived the letter
to be a menace only; her greatest unhappiness was, that if any information had
been given to him, through a suspicion of the servants, it might reach her
father's ears, through the same channel, and occasion a great deal of
unhappiness; for though no man was more warm in his friendships, no one was
more violent in his resentments. Should such a thing take place, I told her,
whether I was in the house, or out of it, she had my consent to disown it, and
if I was called upon, I would do the same.

THE alarm, however, caused me many an unquiet moment. I had too good an
opinion of Charlotte to think she would betray me, and I was not conscious it
was known to any other part of the family. Lord B. might possibly have heard
that I was taken into the house, and his jealousy might lead him to form a
thousand conceptions, and he might fix on this, in order to mortify Miss
Wildman's pride. However, from the tenor of the letter and from what I heard at
Mrs. Duplex's, I was determined to be prepared for any violent attack, and
therefore never went out afterward, but with a tuck cane and a brace of
pistols loaded.

THE third day after Miss Wildman had shown me Lord B's letter, I was going out
in the evening about six o'clock, in the month of October, and it was then just
at the close of day; I had on a blue surtout-coat with a red cape, and plain
hat with gilt button and loop; and scarce had the porter opened the outer door,
but I heard a voice say, That Is he. At this, I rather drew back, and a man in a
chairman's coat, ran up the steps toward me, and, with a tuck in his hand,
made an attempt to seize me; I struck him upon the arm with my cane, and with
my foot thrust him down off the steps; at that instant I saw two men more
making up to me, armed with bludgeons, one had nearly reached me, on which I
took out one of my pistols and fired it, and as, I believe, killed him on the
spot. I then turned round, in order to take shelter within the house, and found
that the porter tried all he could to shut the door against me; I overpowered
him, however, with strength, forced my way in, bolted the door upon my enemy,
and with the but end of my pistol, laid the porter flat upon the floor. All
this took place in less time than I have been telling it. Finding myself so far
safe, I ran backwards toward the stables, pulled off my surtout coat that I
might not be known, tore the button and loop from my hat, and made my escape
into the Meuse, in which our stables stood. As soon as I found myself at
liberty, I pushed away to a neighboring stand of coaches, got into one and bid
the coachman drive me toward St. Giles's church. When I was out of the reach
of any pursuit, I began to consider what was proper to be done. Perfectly
convinced from the porter's endeavoring to shut me out, that he must be a
party concerned, I determined to write to my master, and beg him to stand my
friend and least a warrant should be issued to apprehend me, to get off, the
next morning, to some distance from London. When I was near the end of Oxford
Road, I ordered the coachman to set me down, walked on about half a mile, went
into a tavern and wrote a letter, of which the following is a copy:

SIR,
I WILL not preface this letter with its cause; er'e this, you are too well
acquainted with it, I am safe at present from any fear of danger or of being
apprehended. From a declaration of Lord B's at Mrs. Duplex's, since I had the
honor of being useful to Miss Wildman, that he would take an opportunity to be
revenged of me, and from some other circumstances, I have reason to believe,
that he waylaid me at your door; for, on my going out, a fellow, in a
chairman's coat, with a tuck in his hand, endeavored to lay hold of me. I beat
his arm down with my cane, and with my foot thrust him from the steps; at this
instant two more fellows with bludgeons endeavored to lay violent hands on me,
the foremost I fired at and possibly may have killed, for I saw him fall.
Attempting to return into the house, John, your porter, did all he could to
prevent it, by forcing the door against me; I succeeded, however, contrary to
his wishes, and from a conviction that he must, from such conduct, have been
privy to the design against me, I knocked the scoundrel down with my pistol. If
he lived to rise again, you will probably, by having him before a magistrate,
come at the bottom of this dark affair; I trust you will do it, not only in
justice to yourself and the world; but to your unfortunate, but respectful
humble servant,

GABRIEL OUTCAST.
P.S. Part of the fifty pounds you was pleased to give me, is in my trunk in my
room, which I beg leave to commit to your disposal, having sufficient money for
my present occasions.




I thought of writing to Miss Wildman, according to my promise; but, dropped
it, lest my letter should have been intercepted by her father; and as I knew
she would be made acquainted with my situation from what I had written to him.
I walked into the Strand with this letter and thence dispatched a chairman with
it to Berkley Square. This done, I found my mind at ease, went into a
coffee-house, got me some refreshment reconnoitred the depth of my purse, which
contained rather better than three guineas, and went out, about ten o'clock, in
quest of a lodging; which, in order to elude all search, I determined should be
in one of those houses, in the narrow part of St. Giles's, where vagrants are
taken in at twopence a night. I soon found out such a lodging, and that my
dress might create no suspicion, I turned my coat wrong side outward, loosened
the knees of my breeches, slouched my hat, rolled myself in the kennel, and
affected to be in liquor. It answered all the purposes I wished, and I was
shown up to a bed, without sheets, where some poor wretch was already lain and
fast sleep. I was no sooner in the room, than the man, who showed me up-stairs,
asked me for twopence for my lodging, locked the door upon me, and told me,
when I rose and chose to be let out, to ring the bell. He left me no candle,
and all the light I had was from a lamp on the staircase, that gave light
within the room, by a little window over the door. I could not find out by that
light what kind of a person my bedfellow was, but I examined his clothes, and,
by the best conjecture I could make, supposed him to be a laboring man. His
breeches were leather, but exceedingly greasy, and neither strings nor buckles
at the knees; his waistcoat had been scarlet, but it had but one flap and four
buttons, and his coat was originally what is called a thickset, but out at the
elbows; his hat round, but grown brown with age, and his stockings blue
worsted, but full of darns; they were, however, tolerably well mended and
pretty clean. I tried on the coat and waistcoat and found they fitted me well
enough. The reader will perhaps wonder at all this; but, when I tell him my
design, he will wonder no longer. My plan was to rise before he waked and
change clothes with him, that I might get into the country, in such disguise
without fear of interruption. As I was not much disposed for sleep, I surveyed
my room, and found the furniture consisted of a broken chair or two, a table
with three legs, an old stove in the fireplace, with a shovel and poker
chained to the chimney, perhaps, lest a lodger should be pleased to make free
with them; and lest we should carry away the blankets was the reason, I
presume, of our being locked in. Bad as the bed was, I laid me down upon it,
but could not get a wink of sleep; therefore, when I heard the watchman cry
four, my companion being still snoring, I dressed myself in his clothes, except
his shoes, and instead of four pence half penny and a little tobacco which I
found in his pocket, I left the poor devil half a crown, and flattered myself
he would not be unhappy at the change; for though distressed at my own
situation, I could not but feel for his. I next cut my hair short in the poll,
with a knife, I had in my pocket, and pulled it over my forehead; and could I
have seen myself, I have no doubt but I should have started at my own figure.
When completely dressed, I rung the bell, and was let out, the chamberlain
turning the key upon the man I had left asleep. The fellow said nothing to me,
nor I to him, and I walked off as composed, as if I had nothing to trouble me.

It being rather a cold morning, I walked hastily toward Hyde-Park corner,
without any thing about me of value, except, my pistols, my cane, my buckles,
my ring, my shirt and my pocket handkerchief, and about three pounds in money.
I was presently overtaken by the Exeter coach, and got up into the basket.
