OUR captain or ruler being the cleverst and best informed fellow of the whole
gang, and having a genteel carriage, I was desirous of knowing his history; and
one day when the party was upon the scout, and we two left alone, at my
request, he gave me the following account of himself.

Who my mother was, I cannot say, but the person who called himself my father,
was a sheriff's officer, who got pretty snugly into life, by plundering the
wretched, and preying upon the oppressed. When I was at an age to remember any
thing concerning him, he had a woman lived with him who passed for my
mother-in-law; but it is a doubt with me, whether every they were married.
However, be that as it may, they lived together as man and wife. The common
public room of our house, was a miserable dungeon, under ground, calculated to
convey an idea of horror, that men who had lived tolerably in the world, and
who on an action for debt, were unfortunate enough to fall into his hands,
might loath the very sight of the place, and be glad to give him five shillings
a week to be admitted into a better room. We had one upstairs, that would
contain twenty perssons, and it was generally full at five shillings a head;
this with half a guinea a week, for half a bed, and two shillings and sixpence
a day from each, for a wretched breakfast and a worse dinner, put a
considerable deal of money into my father's pocket: but this was not the only
mode he had of gaining money. Sheriff's officers give security always for their
trust, so that if they serve a writ, and let the prisoner go at large, after he
is once arrested, they are liable to pay the debt: it is on this account they
will make fifty excuses rather than serve a writ in the presence of the
attorney or the plaintiff; but when there is no prying eye upon their conduct,
they will often, on receiving a present of a guinea or two, suffer their
prisoners to go and look for their bail themselves; and should they, when at
liberty, not keep their word, and attend the officer at the time appointed, he
will tell the paintiff or his attorney, that he never was able to meet with the
defendant. In this school, the receptacle of a variety of wretchedness, was I
brought up till I was nineteen years old, and if I was born with any natural
feelings, they were here quite eradicated. I was taught to load an unhappy
wretch with additional misery, and rob him of every little degree of comfort he
might possess, in order to make him pine for relief, which relief was never
afforded but at an exorbitant price. We had a license for selling wine; but
that wine was so poor and so sour, that it required something stronger always
to qualify it; and, if a prisoner wished to send out for brandy or strong beer,
we always exacted as much for fetching it, as the liquor was worth. I should
have continued with my father, he designing me to be one of his followers, but
my mother-in-law led me such a weary life, that one day when my father was out,
I opened his bureau, made free with about twenty pounds of his ill-gotten
wealth, and decamped; and of course, never durst see his face again.

I HAD sense enough, with these twenty pounds to equip myself with necessary
clothes, and by an application to a register-office, got me a place; a
character for which, cost me no less than a guinea. As a Sheriff's officer has
always bail at hand, to give security to an action, at a price proportionable
to the debt the prisoner is arrested for, so these keepers of register-offices,
have always a housekeeper or two ready to give a character to those who want
one, and are enabled to purchase it. The price of a written character is a
crown; that of a verbal one, by one of these friends, a guinea. It was a
guinea, however, well laid out, and I did not grudge it. It procured me a place
at a tea-dealer's in Bond-street, to open and shut up shop, carray out parcels,
and do other things. My master, from dealing with women of fashion, had
acquired a smoothness of tongue sufficient to deceive the devil, and he found
it of great use to him. If any woman came to his shop in a coach, or on foot
with a servant behind her, whether titled or not, she was always a lady, and
during her stay, the word ladyship was seldom out of his mouth. He would stand
all day dressed at his shop door, when he had no customers within, and bow to
every carriage that passed; and whilst he was at dinner, he expected me to be
dressed, and to bow for him. Why didn't you bow to that coach, said he to me,
one day warmly? I told him it was empty, -- what is that to the purpose you
blockhead, returns he? Always bow to a coronet full or empty. And he profited
by this plan; for he had a world of business, and was supposed to be a monied
man. I was in the shop one day, when a lady accustomed to drink twenty shilling
tea, came in and asked to see some of his best Hyson. He showed her a cannister
at eighteen shillings a pound. She took it to the light, smelt it, tasted it,
rubbed it in the palm of her hand, smelt it again, and enquired if he had no
better; he assured her ladyship, there was no better to be bounght, and perhaps
he spoke the truth; for all tea-dealers mix their teas, as wine merchants
adulterate their wine and spirits. They make Hyson of all prices, from ten
shillings to eighteen, by mixing it with what is called Bloom, or common green;
then again they dye it and scent it; a few drops of Bergamot, etc. thrown into
a pound of Souchong, is sold for Cowslip, or a tea of a superior nature; and as
I generally had a hand in these adulterations, I can take upon me to say, I
believe the tea my master showed this lady, was as genuine as any she could
have met with. But, it would not do; Better, says she, Mr. Congo, is certainly
to be bought, for I drink better every day, though it is true I give more money
for it. If you have no better, I am sorry for the trouble I have given you. On
her leaving the shop, he replied, if your ladyship does not object to price, I
have a peculiar kind at thirty-six shillings a pound, which I defy the whole
town to equal. Thirty-six shillings! exclaimed she, returning, I never heard of
such a price, -- it must be a curiosity! -- Pray let me see it. He then reached
down another cannister of the same tea, and she, examining it with some
attention, cries, this to be sure is considerably better; but the price amazes
me. -- Why did not you show me this at first? Weigh me out two pounds, and if I
like it, I will send for more. Thus did this fanciful woman pay thirty-six
shillings a pound for tea, which she might have had for eighteen. But it is the
way with these ladies; not knowing the value or price of commodities, they are
taken in by almost every tradesman they deal with. So that with all the parade
of prying, looking over, examining, enquiring, cheapening, and so on, they will
give fifty per cent more than other people. Knowing nothing beyond the line of
life they are in, they rate the goodness of every thing by its price, and
conceive a lowpriced article to be naught but trash. Goods within their
knowledge, they will go far a-foot to purchase. City traders unused to deal
with such persons, will not often take advantage of their ignorance. They will
not ask fifteen shillings for a purse at a coach door, which they will sell for
half the money to a customer on foot. There are some ladies shrewd enough to
know this; and yet these, instead of going in their own carriage, will pay four
shillings for a hackney coach, to save twopence a yard on a dozen yards of
ribband. In a word, they owe all this to their pride, their vanity and parade;
they will go a shopping as they call it, morning after morning, tumble over a
great variety of goods, give a great deal of trouble, and not buy; and often
when they do buy, they will not pay for years. Were persons of fortune to act
consistently, they would soon find their account in it; but whilst they go on
as they do, they must not be surprised at any thing they meet with.

I TOLD the captain, that I had not only heard that wine-merchants adulterated
their wines, but absolutely made them.

THERE is not the least doubt of it, returns he; three fourths of the white
wine drank in this kingdom, are compositions put together here, and made
palatable by a liquor they call flavor; and as to Port, what is generally
drank, is a mixture of malt-spirits, red wine and turnip-juice For the benefit
of economical readers, the following are the proportions. Forty-eight gallons
of liquor pressed from turnips, eight gallons of malt spirits, and eight
gallons of good Port wine, colored with Cochineal and roughened with elder
tops. It should stand two years in casks, and one in bottles. If rough cider is
substituted for turnip-juice, and Coniac-brandy for malt spirits, the wine will
be the better.
; -- for the whole kingdom of Portugal could not furnish half the quantity here
consumed. But to return, says he, to my story.

I SHOULD have continued with Mr. Congo longer, but I happened one day, to let
the cat out of the bag, by telling my master, inadvertently before the
exciseman, who happened to be in the shop, that a bag of tea which he had
stowed away in the cellar, was burst, and a good deal of the tea shed. For
there is not a teadealer in town or country, but what smuggles more or less.
They are to conceal no exciseable goods from the inspection of the exciseman,
and this idle expression of mine, not only cost him a silencing fee of twenty
guineas to steer clear of the Exchequer, but it lost me my place.

I APPLIED again to a register-office, and was next in the service of Mr.
Porcelain, a chinaman in St. James's Street. This master, like my last, had
little to do but with women of fashion, and gave me an opportunity of seeing a
little more of their folly. He had originally been a Welsh drover, was a man of
low cunning, and where he picked up his knowledge in china, I know not, but he
was reckoned, a connoisseur, and became the standard of taste in this branch of
trade. Possessed of the most beautiful and valuable collection in town, his
shop was the morning saunter of thoseladies whose fancy took that turn. His
mode of keeping up this collection, was by culling the china closets of women
of quality in a very artful and designing way. His plan was to find out what
ladies had the best collection, and whenever they came to his shop, he gave
them to understand, that he took china in exchange, and possibly they might
have a few odd articles, of little value to them, but which when assorted with
other pieces, which he might find amongst his lumber, might be worth something.
This generally procured him access to the closet: besides, there are few
collectors of china, but (like collectors of natural curiosities) are fond of
displaying their collections before those who are esteemed virtuosos.

HE was one day in lady Betty Soft's closet, when a pair of old vases of
uncommon beauty struck him. But, he was silent. She showed him every thing in
turn; and asked his opinion of it. He did not fail to praise most things of
little value, and depreciate many of intrinsic worth; but declared he had not
seen upon the whole a more valuable collection any where, and that her
Ladyship, showed herself a woman of uncommon taste. There was nothing, he said,
throughout the closet, that arraigned that taste, but those vulgar vases in the
corner, which he would advise her ladyship to put upon the mantlepiece in her
nursery. Nursery, says she, Mr. Porcelain? they will soon be of no value there,
and they cost me a great deal of money. Then your ladyship was imposed on,
returned he. You had better take them then, replied lady Betty, with these odd
articles we have picked out. They were of little worth he said, by themselves
but along with other things, he would allow her ladyship something for them. He
accordingly took them away with him; and was no sooner gone, than her
ladyship's maid was rung for, and made acquainted with the business of the
morning. Porcelain, the china-man, says she, has been here, and those vases,
which you and others have so much admired, I find are trumpery things. Who told
your ladyship so? replies the maid. Porcelain himself; returns she, he declared
they were the most paltry things in nature, and a disgrace to my closet; and he
has taken them away. Taken them away! exclaims Bridget, sure, my lady, you
would not suffer yourself to be cheated in that style; he has under-valued them
merely to get them into his own clutches, and will sell them as great rarities.
-- Aye! says lady Betty, then send Thomas after him immediately, and let him
bring them back. Thomas was instantly dispatched, but Porcelain, on his
reaching home ordered me to carry them up to the top of the house; and on being
told the man's errand, cried out, how very unfortunate! I had no sooner brought
them and set them down upon my counter, but a gentleman, who came in at that
instand, asked the price of that ordinary pair of vases, and I have sold them
to him for a song. Run, Will, says he, to me, down that street, you may
possibly overtake him -- in a scarlet gold-laced waistcoat -- he has not been
out of the shop five minutes. I set off as he ordered me -- but the vases were
irrecoverable. And three months afterward, with some additional painted
ornaments to disguise them, they added to his stock of china, and were rated as
antiques.

ON my smiling at the idea of his painting it a-fresh, he told me, it was a
practice with him. He had been known to sell a whole service of white china
painted and varnished over, for that which is burnt in, and when a dinner has
been served up in it, the steam of the dishes has obliterated the painting, and
all the figures have vanished. He used to survey his customers from head to
foot, and ask a price according to their appearance. What shall I give you,
says a lady, one day, to him for that set of Dresden china? It was Chelsea, but
as she took it for Dresden, he asked a Dresden price, (twenty guineas) and it
was purchased. In a few weeks afterward, her friends infomed her it was
Chelsea. She accordingly flew to him and wondered how he could presume, to sell
her that set of Chelsea china for Dresden. I never sold it for Dresden, returns
he; your ladyship asked me, what I would have for that set of Dresden china. I
thought you had been a judge of china by your buying it up so. Had it been
Dresden, it should not have gone for forty pieces. But, if your ladyship
dislikes it, you are welcome to change it for any thing else. Disappointed, she
looked round and fixed upon a couple of jars worth about ten pounds, which he
valued at thirty; but, to make her ladyship amends, he would only take of her
five guineas, besides the breakfast set. The bargain was struck, the jars put
into the coach, and her ladyship no sooner from the door, than he turned round
to me, hugging himself in his adroitness, with a 'By G-d, one of the jars is
cracked.'

THIS puts me in mind of a story, I have some where met with. A cane-seller in
London, sold a gentleman a cane for five guineas, and to a second, the same
kind of cane for ten, telling him it was a unique, and there was not such
another in the kingdom; these two happiening to meet, and the last upon an
examination of the two canes, conceiving himself imposed on, went to the person
of whom he bought it, and rated him upon the subject; but he had sufficient
address to reconcile his customer to the purchase; who implicitly believed what
the seller told him. It is a great misfortune, Sir, says he, that you are
unacquainted with the great value of that cane. I have been looking out for you
every day, expecting you would have called to have thanked me for letting you
into so good a purchase on such easy terms. I have examined the two canes,
replied the gentleman, and see no difference. Difference! exclaimed the seller,
-- all the difference in the world -- the one I sold for five guineas, is
merely jam- be; whereas yours is a jam- beau.

SUCH a man was my second master; and you may suppose, that under the roof of
two such artful instructors, I must certainly have improved. I learned a good
deal before I left home; but acquired a further degree of knowledge under Mr.
Congo and Mr. Porcelain. I fell in so much with my master's natural
disposition, that he began to like me; but an accident here also deprived me of
my place. Our shop was seldom kept open after five o'clock, so that I had a
good deal of time upon my hands; -- some of my evenings I, used to spend at a
spouting club in the neighborhood; where, though a very bad speaker, I got
such a rage for declamation, that I was always repeating some passages or
other, whenever I, had opportunity. When I spent my evenings at home, I used to
entertain the maids with my theatrical abilities. One of these, Susan, a simple
country wench, was mightily taken with my speeches. I have ranted away Hotspur,
till she has, with her mouth open, been as stiff, and as motionless as a
statue. But one evening, when I was in spirits, I gave them a few passages out
of Alexander the Great, and I had worked myself up to such a pitch, in the
scene with Clytus, that when I was to kill him, in a paroxism of rage, I kicked
down the table, forgetting that my master was overhead. This made such a
clatter, that the bell was rung, and, Susan went up, scarce recovered from that
frigidity of horror, my murderous tongue at first had thrown her into. What Is
all that d -- mned racked below? says my master -- Nothing, Sir, says she, but
Alexander has just killed Clyphus. If he goes on in this way, returns my
master, I shall have him in one of his fits, dealing death among the china, and
do me twenty pounds worth of mischief. -- Upon this I was discharged.

I GAVE him to understand that i was quite entertained with his manner of
telling his story, as it fell in with my notions, that of making remarks on
life as I passed along, and begged him to proceed.

HE replied, from what he could learn from his acquaintance who were in the
service of others, that tradesmen, show their worst goods and oldest patterns
first, particularly silk-mercers, linen and woollen-drapers, haberdashers, and
the like; that they have particular lights in their shops to give them a false
appearance; that they pretend to examine the goods narrowly, to make the buyer
suppose they would not deceive him, ask more than the thing is worth to allow
for abating, crib a little in the quantity or measure, and then reach their
scales to weight the money they receive. In short, that there is not a trade or
profession but what has its mysteries and arts of defrauding; that men open
their shops, set out their goods every morning to impose upon their customers,
and cheerfully shut them up again at night, after having cheated all the day,
like the woman who after talking all the scandal she can, wipes her mouth and
says she has done no harm.

SINCE then, continued he, as whatever is, is right, and these men with whom I
had lived were doing so well in the world by a little artifice and finesse, I
was unhappy I could not strike out into some way of life myself that would
raise me above the situation of a servant. However, thought I, as there is a
tide in the fortune of all men, I will wait with patience. Something may turn
up unexpectedly.
