I PRESENTLY, continued he, got another place, which was to wait upon a young
gentleman, who lived upon an allowance from his father. The old man, was a
widower, had been very low bred, but was fortunately in the possession of a
good estate, which he squandered away in a very extraordinary manner. He was
immoderately fond of farming, and fancied he had a talent, which few men
possessed, that of improving land to the highest degree of luxuriancy. He was
of opinion, that, of all men, he who made two blades of grass grow, where only
one grew before, was the most useful in society. Under this idea, he took farms
in most parts of the kingdom, though he had not sufficient to stock them; he
neither ploughed nor sowed, but laid down all the land he could in grass, and
what he could not lay down properly, he suffered nature to lay down for him
with scutch grass, thistles and docks. Though he was a sensible and shrewd man
in other respects, he was a madman in farming, and would almost deprive himself
of necessaries, to lay it out upon land, which yielded him little or no return.
The finest crops of grass and clover he has suffered to rot on the ground;
under a notion of feeding the land. Nay, he has been known to sow his grass
lands with carrot and turnip seed, and on being asked his reason for it;
replied, grass land could not be too full of seeds. He has filled a barn with
potatoes, washed and piled away at a great expense, and suffered them to stand
there and grow through the thatch. I mention all this, to convince you there
could be no harm in robbing such a man, for the sake of his son, whom he had
brought up a gentleman, and whom, whilst possessing a large fortune, he would
scarce allow sufficient to exist on. I really pitied my young master, who was
an only child, from my heart, and used to plead his cause with the old
gentleman often, but could seldom extort any thing from him. However, one day,
when I had been about a year in the family, I contrived to get a little of his
cash: he had just received a debt of four hundred pounds, and was coming into
the room where I and my master were. -- I gave my master the wink and he left
us; and the old gentleman, having the bag in his hand, shut to the door; but
did not see that I was in the room. This is a strange age we live in, said he
to himself, I know not what to make of it. Never was there a greater fondness
for money, nor so much difficulty in getting one's own. Debts nowadays, are
like children, begot with pleasure, but brought forth with pain; however I have
no need to complain, having just received four hundred pounds, that has been
owing to me two years, and it will go a great way toward stocking Littlecot
farm. -- So, Mr. Rascal, continues he, seeing me and hurrying the bag into his
coat-pocket! -- Rascal, Sir! returns I, I am sure I don't deserve that name.
Yes, rascal, says he, you are the ruin of my son. You may tell him I am very
angry with him. With my master, Sir? replies I, Indeed, you are not the only
one who complains of him; his conduct is grown so abominable of late, that it
drives me beyond all patience. Indeed! says the old man, why, I thought you and
he were perfectly agreed. Me, Sir? returns I, affecting unhappiness at his
son's conduct, far from it; I preach to him too much, for that; I am sure, I am
always putting him in mind of the duty he owes to you and to himself. Why, we
are every moment at daggers drawing. -- He cannot bear I should tell him how ill
he behaves to you. And do you quarrel with him for this? says he, That I do,
and pretty handsomely too, returned I. I have been under a great mistake then,
says he, for I always understood that you encouraged him in his extravagance
and disobedience. Ah, Sir, exclaimed I, see how innocence is often slandered
and oppressed! Sir, if I may be believed, was you to pay me for being his
governor, I could not say more to him than I do, to make him behave more
soberly and discreetly; Sir, says I to him very often, in the name of goodness,
don't be carried away thus with every wind that blows, observe a more prudent
carriage, and consider the worthy gentleman your father, who is depriving
himself of necessaries to save and get money for you. The old man seemed to
chuckle at this, and coming up to me, I made an attempt to pick his pocket of
the bag; but not succeeding, I went on. -- And no longer break his poor heart
with your behavior, but take up and live as he does with reputation and
honor. Here I made another attempt and succeeded. Why, that was well said,
replied the old gentleman. And what answer does he make? Answer? says I, A pack
of stuff that almost makes me mad; not, but to say the truth, he retains in his
heart the seeds of honor and virtue, you have there sown. But, alas, his
reason has no longer any power over him! However, Sir, I hope I shall be able
to bring him over at last. Do so, my good lad, returns the old man, altering
his voice to a softer tone than when he called me rascal, Do, and you will find
me your friend. -- When you see him next -- be sure you say as many fine things
of me as you can? Let me alone, Sir, says I, for that; I Will do the business,
never fear. At this he was going to quit the room; but returned as recollecting
himself, with, Lord, lord, how forgetful I am! I protest I was going away,
without so much as thanking you for your good services. Stay. -- I Will give thee
something to remember me, and began to feel for his bag: frighted out of my
wits, lest he should miss it, I caught hold of his hand, with Not a farthing,
Sir. He, on the contrary, seeming determined to gratify men, cried out, I
insist upon it; but I would not quit my hold; and declared he should not,
saying I was not one of those selfish persons who act only from interest. I
know that, says he, but still -- carrying his hand toward his pocket; but as I
had not quitted him, I pulled it rather forcibly the other way and addressed
him warmly, with I must desire, Sir, you will desist; I am a man of honor and
any farther offers of this nature will affront me. At this he gave it up, but
suppose, says he, you was to carry my son a little present, perhaps, that may
lead him to think you his friend? By no means, Sir, returned I, still
frightened lest he should miss his bag. Keep your money. It will look too much
like a bribe. -- If I see occasion, I can but ask you. Well then, says he, be
it so. -- But be sure ply him well, and leave no stone unturned to bring him
over, and I shall ever value you, At this he left the room, and me almost out
of breath for fear. As soon as he was gone, I took fifty guineas out of the bag
for myself, for I think I deserved it, and carried the rest to my young master,
telling him how I got it. He seemed very thankful and gave me ten pieces for my
cleverness; for, said he, he was sure it was no sin to take it from him, as it
would otherwise have been thrown away upon a barren soil.

A few hours after, whilst my young master and I were together, the old
gentleman joined us, and seemed to be in a very surly mood. What are you two
laying your heads together about? -- No good I warrant you. And I hope, no harm
Sir, says his son. That Is more, returns he, than I know. I Am sorry, says I, to
see you so much out of humor, Sir. Peace, rascal, cries he, or I Will lay my
cane over you. -- Sorrow's but poor comfort to a man that is lost his purse.
Have you really lost it? Says my young master; yes blockhead, returns his
father, I have really lost it. -- Have you found it? I wish I had, says the
son. The devil doubts you, returns the father. If you had, I should never see
it again Had it fallen into my master's hands, says I, I Will be answerable it
would have been returned untouched. Yes, yes, replies he, rogues are always
ready to answer for one another. I wish you would answer for yourself; it was
whilst I was listening to you, scoundrel, or soon after, that I lost it; it was
picked out of my coat-pocket, or I must have pulled it out with my
handkerchief. Pulled it out with your handkerchief most likely Sir, returned I:
what kind of purse was it? That I suppose, says he, you would be glad to know;
no, no; I have no other mark to claim it by. On my telling him it might fall in
my way to recover it for him, if he would describe it to me, he seemed to
listen to me, and desired his son to leave us together. As soon as he was gone,
he began to address me in softer terms, and said, his bastard's extravagant
course of life, often put him out of humor, and led him to say things he did
not wish to say. Upon the whole, says he, my good fellow, I have secretly
considered you as a faithful honest lad; and would a few hours ago, have given
you a small testimony of my good opinion, but your confounded scruples, would
not suffer me. I beg I may do it now. At this he gave me a couple of guineas,
and, if you can, says he, by any means recover my money for me, I Will be a
friend to you as long as I live. You are sensible, Sir, replied I, if it is
possible to be recovered, it cannot be done without great trouble and some
expense. What reward are you willing to give the finder? Hah? Reward? says he,
starting at the very idea, -- suppose you offer a few guineas, -- you may go as
far as five. -- I asked him what was the sum he lost. Four hundred pounds, says
he. And can you think cried I, of offering so small a reward? That would undo
us quite, the meanness of the offer would prevent its being returned, in order
to punish you. -- Five, indeed, in hand, as a part of fifty more, if returned
-- nothing like generosity in these cases. Was it not a canvas bag: at the word
canvas, he seemed transported, I thought he would have kissed me. Yes, a canvas
bag, I see, my dear fellow, says he, you do know something of it. I told him,
that I did hear such a bag was found by a poorish man, but little imagined it
was his; so probably if this man could be found, what with persuasions,
threats, promises, and good words, it might be recovered. Nothing more likely,
says he, -- Do then, my good lad, set about it immediately, for no time should
be lost. -- But, Sir, returned I, the search of this man will be attended with
some expense, and you know, Sir, I am not in a situation to give you credit.
Upon which he gave me three guineas. Three guineas! exclaimed I, what is three
guineas? I cannot think of looking mean in this affair, purely for your sake,
this drew from him two pieces more; then Sir, there is drink-money, that got
another guinea, -- messengers to one place -- this a guinea more -- dispatches
to another -- Bribes to one -- hush-money to another. God's Death, says the old
man, who gave me more and more for every purpose; I Will give no more unless its
brought me: but, Sir, says I, you forget the five pieces as a reward in hand.
Zounds, says he, at this rate, you will pick my pocket of every guinea I have. --
Well, having got about twenty guineas from him, I promised him to do my best;
but on my leaving him, he directed me to count the money and see the gold was
all weight, and that none of it was changed.

I ASKED him if he returned the bag of money. Not a shilling, says he. The
fifty I took, I had too many uses for, and the remainder, which I gave my young
master, I believe, did not continue with him long enough even to know how much
he had. He never counted his money; he judged of the quantity only by the time
if lasted.
