WITH this fifty pounds I determined to set up for myself, accordingly I
quitted my place, and hearing of an orphan young lady of seventeen years of
age, who was heiress to a fortune of six thousand a year, one thousand of which
she enjoyed durher minority, and who lived with an aunt at the west end of the
town; I determined to make a bold push, and try if I could not carry her; with
this view I equipped myself with a suit or two of genteel clothes, and passed
for a gentleman. Having found out the house where she lived, I frequently
walked under the window, with the hopes of seeing her, and, at last I saw one
whom I took to be her, and she was as pretty, as she was rich. My next step
was, if possible, to get access to her. For this purpose, I went to a
public-house in the neighborhood, addressed myself to a chairman I there
found, and made many enquiries respecting the family, particularly where they
visited, and where they resided in the country: all this I learnt; this done, I
contrived to get to the ear of some of the servants, which I likewise effected.
The chairman to whom I first applied, told me, that the footman and coachman
used that house, and were generally there in an evening between tea-time and
supper. At this hour I went, and was introduced to them. I took the footman
apart, gave him to understand I was a gentleman and a man of family and
fortune; that accident had thrown me into the way of his young mistress and I
wished to be better acquainted with her; and if he would assist me in so doing,
I would endeavor to be his friend, and as an earnest of that friendship I
tipped him half a guinea: he promised me all the assistance in his power, and
told me, that both she and her aunt were to be at the play the next day, having
a couple of box tickets for a benefit. This intelligence was every thing I
could wish. I was at the theater the same night, procured admission into the
same box, and had the happiness to be particularly noticed by her; for I set
close by her side. When the play was over, I handed her to her carriage, and
politely took my leave. The day following, I found out the footman again, and
made enquiries respecting the lady's maid. He assured me, she was an
open-hearted girl, and did not doubt, but she would favor my views. I wished
very much to see her; and he promised to ask her to give me a meeting. An
opportunity soon occurred for that purpose; the footman brought me word the
next day, that his young mistress and her aunt, went out an airing every
morning about twelve, and that if I would go to the house in their absence, he
had made their porter acquainted with my wishes, and he would let Miss's maid
know when I was there. I took the first opportunity of going, and saw the coach
drive from the door. A tete-a-tete soon took place between me and the maid,
whom I made also my friend by a present of five guineas. She promised to plead
my cause with her young mistress, and did it effectually. An interview was
appointed, and I was to meet her in Kensington Gardens. On the day fixed, she
promised to be there with her maid, who, on my coming up, retired. I had now an
opportunity of pressing my suit, and I did it with as much warmth, as if I had
been really in love. I told her a thousand lies so passionately, that the poor
little credulous thing believed them all, and at parting promised to meet me
again the first opportunity. The ice being now broken, through the means of
this servant, we carried on a correspondence for near a month, when I was given
to understand, that the family was retiring to their seat in Hampshire."

THIS business was expensive, but thinking myself sure of my prize, I obtained
goods upon credit, and pawned them as soon as delivered; by this means, I was
enabled to keep up appearances. I followed Miss into the country, where under a
pretense of taking a walk, I had frequent opportunities of being with her,
unnoticed by her aunt. The servants I took care to keep in my interest. She
agreed at last to give me her hand, and it was proposed that we should set off
for Scotland, and that her maid should accompany us. Having thus brought things
to a crisis; and finding she was possessed of some very valuable diamonds, I
advised her by all means to take those with her, as she could not think of
returning home, and it was impossible to make a proper appearance without them:
she acquiesced with this proposal, and the day was fixed for her elopement; but
as the devil would have it, and accident happened that overthrew all I had been
about.

THERE being at the house I was at, an evening club, where the neighbors used
to meet, smoke their pipes and fettle the affairs of administration; having
been admitted among them, I passed my time rather agreeably than otherwise. One
of the party was an elderly tradesman, lately married to a smart young woman,
whom I had once or twice seen, and was much taken with; but he was so much
under petticoat government, that she used to fetch him home at night at a
regular hour. He had been often rallied on this head, and was so greatly
ashamed of it, that, under a promise not to stay longer than eleven, she agreed
to go to bed before him. Like other babblers, who often lay open their own
affairs unasked, and frequently to their prejudice; he gave us to understand,
she was too jealous to suffer the maid to fit up for him, and that as the door
would not unlock on the outside, it was left upon the latch. On being asked
whether she left a light. A light? Says he, no. -- Our house is not so large,
but I can find my way up into my room without a light; we lay but on the one
pair of stairs, over the shop. I was determined he should one day pay dear for
this communication, and concerted it with the rest of the company, to keep him
from home beyond his usual hour, to see whether his wife would come the next
night to fetch him. Accordingly, in the course of conversation, talking of the
uxoriousness of husbands, I put my gentleman upon the metal, and offered to lay
him a bet of two guineas, that he durst not stay out that night till half after
twelve. From an opinion that his wife would be asleep, and not know the hour of
his return, he took the bet, and when the clock struck eleven, was exceeding
good company. About twenty minutes after, I took a French leave, went over to
his house, lifted the latch, and without much difficulty, found my way into the
chamber over the shop. All was quiet, and the fair one asleep. Having undressed
myself at the stair head without the door, I stole into the room, and the
reader may suppose I was not long before I was between the sheets. I had but
little time, and was determined to make the best use of it. She soon waked and
spoke to me, but found me not disposed to answer. However, whether she was able
in the dark, to distinguish between her husband and me, or any way discovered
the cheat, I know not; but this I know, she was as kind to me as I could wish.
-- When I found her composed, I began to retire, but she soon missed me from
the bed, and hearing me fumbling at the door, and I not answering her when she
spoke, suspecting I suppose, some trick had been played her, she rose with
great anger, seized me by the arm before I could get away, alarmed the house,
and I was unfortunately discovered. I was however, suffered to dress myself and
return to my quarters.

THIS affair made a great noise in the village, and presently reached the
mansion. The young lady I was to accompany to Scotland, took offense at my
conduct; and I could never get to see her again. Other reasons might cooperate
against me, but I could not learn what they were. I wrote one or two letters to
her, but all to no purpose. The family presently left the country, and I heard
of her no more: it was a fortunate event for her, but a d -- n'd unlucky one
for me.

The injured husband determined to prosecute me for violating the honor of hs
wife; but the lawyers could not well advise him how to proceed. Some proposed
indicting me capitally for Burglary; lifting a latch and entering a dwelling
house by night, if done with a felonious intent, being a species of that crime;
but as the wife was consenting to the act it could not be felony, of course,
not burglary. The same argument prevented its being deemed a rape. Others were
for indicting me for grand larcency or stealing privately from the person; but
what did I steal? Nothing but her consent. This not being any thing that could
in fact be carried away, the idea of proceeding on that statute fell to the
ground. Actions of trespass, seduction, etc. were then proposed; but the whole
centered at last in a prosecution for crim. con.

BUT this being more than I could stand, I thought it better to decamp; and
wishing, as you did, to hide myself for a while, I made a proposal to this
company to join them, and they admitted me among them.

IN this savage state, though I could boast of few indulgencies, the life I led
was orderly, and free from embarrassments. There was a strict discipline kept
up among us, and a dread of being impeached kept the unruly in awe; for had an
information been laid by any individual of the gang against his comrades, the
neighboring magistrates would never have noticed it; whereas an impeachment by
the whole gang of any individual, would have been sufficient to have called out
a warrant against him; so much was our company considered as a necessary evil.
At our general meetings, each of us, by turns, was the cook for the day, till
the last year of my time, when we took in three young women among us, one of
whom, by the general voice, as ruler, was to be sacred to me, and the other two
were in common among us all. They all proved pregnant before I quitted the
company, and though I did not continue long enough to see how they got over the
difficulty, I understood they meant either to drop their bastards in some
distant parish, lay them at the doors of some gentlemen's houses, or swear them
to persons that had been their common disturbers. However, as I doubted the
fidelity of my lady, I was not very uneasy about what became of her burden. An
event happened that determined me to quit the connection, and when it took place
I left my right in her to my successor.

INFORMATION had been given us, that in a part of the forest, concealed under
ground, a body of smugglers had stowed a considerable quantity of brandy and
other things; we found it out, and the booty consisted of 300 anchors of
brandy, 200 half anchors of gin, and 25 bags of tea, containing 50 lb. each.
This being lodged at a neighboring custom house, it was condemned and solf,
and our part of the money amounted to 540 l. which, shared among eighteen was
30l. a man: thinking I should never meet with a better opportunity of equipping
myself for a more respectable employ, when in possession of the cash, I took a
French leave of my companions, and never have heard any thing of them since.

It was in the summer time when I quitted the forest, and the first place I
retired to was Lymington, where I staid long enough to get myself new dressed.
It is almost inconceivable to think how I labored to reconcile my past conduct
with what is equitable and right. I have often thought, that it is with
diffioulty that men who have been brought up religiously, and with liberal
notions, fall away from an honest course of life; I felt myself hurt at that I
was just emerged from, and endeavored to convince myself, that I was not so
bad, as the world may suppose me, from the account I have here given. I began
with reflecting, that fear had driven me from one society, and that like a
hunted animal I took shelter in the first place that offered: that I no sooner
became a member of the company I have described, but I labored to reclaim
them, and flatter myself that I in a great measure succeeded; from villains of
the first denomination, I reduced them to scoundrels of the second, made them
rather serviceable to the community than otherwise, and had they followed the
example I pointed out by my own conduct, they might have separated and become
honest men: I considered that unlike bad statesmen, bad citizens of every
class, who are a scourge to all men, we only were a scourge to the obnoxious;
and that if the necessities of a state can authorize and render eqitable the
general plunder of our enemy, both by sea and land, we did no more, though in a
narrower scale; we plundered only the enemies of the Customs, of the fair
dealer, and of society. In a word, if I acted wrong, or an unequitable part in
life, I took the first opportunity to relinquish it, and I wish every one could
lay their hand upon their heart and say the same.

I will finish this chapter with a striking anecdote on the subject. A merchant
of London was stopped on the highway by a man whom he soon discovered to have
been once his servant. Instead of delivering his purse as he was ordered, he
began to reason with the robber. Good God, Thomas, could I have supposed that
you woudl have taken to this course of life; you whom I always imagined
strictly honest? -- Come, come, sir, replied the highwayman, bad an I am, I Am
as honest as you. Have not you employed your whole thoughts, time and fortune
in fitting and sending out privateers to plunder the French, and other
countries: and what is this but robbing on the high way? -- As different, says
the merchant, as Light and day, for we have declared war against the French. If
that be all the distinction, retorts the robber; I have declared war against
all mankind. -- Therefore give me your money, or by God I Will blow your brains
out. -- The only difference between you and me, said a pirate to Alexander the
Great, who upbraided him with piracy, is, that I commit hostilities with a
single ships, you with a whole fleet.
