
Mr Monckton had, at this time, a party of company assembled at his house for 
the purpose of spending the Christmas holidays. He waited with anxiety the 
arrival of Cecilia, and flew to hand her from the chaise before Mr Harrel could 
alight. He observed the melancholy of her countenance, and was much pleased to 
find that her London journey had so little power to charm her. He conducted her 
to the breakfast parlour, where Lady Margaret and his friends expected her.
Lady Margaret received her with a coldness that bordered upon incivility; 
irascible by nature and jealous by situation, the appearance of beauty alarmed, 
and of chearfulness disgusted her. She regarded with watchful suspicion whoever 
was addressed by her husband, and having marked his frequent attendance at the 
Deanery, she had singled out Cecilia for the object of her peculiar antipathy; 
while Cecilia, perceiving her aversion though ignorant of its cause, took care 
to avoid all intercourse with her but what ceremony exacted, and pitied in 
secret the unfortunate lot of her friend.
The company now present consisted of one lady and several gentlemen.
Miss Bennet, the lady, was in every sense of the phrase, the humble companion 
of Lady Margaret; she was low-born, meanly educated, and narrow-minded; a 
stranger alike to innate merit or acquired accomplishments, yet skilful in the 
art of flattery, and an adept in every species of low cunning. With no other 
view in life than the attainment of affluence without labour, she was not more 
the slave of the mistress of the house, than the tool of its master; receiving 
indignity without murmur, and submitting to contempt as a thing of course.
Among the gentlemen, the most conspicuous, by means of his dress, was Mr 
Aresby, a captain in the militia; a young man who having frequently heard the 
words red-coat and gallantry put together, imagined the conjunction not merely 
customary, but honourable, and therefore, without even pretending to think of 
the service of his country, he considered a cockade as a badge of politeness, 
and wore it but to mark his devotion to the ladies, whom he held himself 
equipped to conquer, and bound to adore.
The next who by forwardness the most officious took care to be noticed, was Mr 
Morrice, a young lawyer, who, though rising in his profession, owed his success 
neither to distinguished abilities, nor to skill-supplying industry, but to the 
art of uniting suppleness to others with confidence in himself. To a reverence 
of rank, talents, and fortune the most profound, he joined an assurance in his 
own merit, which no superiority could depress; and with a presumption which 
encouraged him to aim at all things, he blended a good-humour that no 
mortification could lessen. And while by the pliability of his disposition he 
avoided making enemies, by his readiness to oblige, he learned the surest way 
of making friends by becoming useful to them.
There were also some neighbouring squires; and there was one old gentleman, 
who, without seeming to notice any of the company, sat frowning in a corner.
But the principal figure in the circle was Mr Belfield, a tall, thin young man, 
whose face was all animation, and whose eyes sparkled with intelligence. He had 
been intended by his father for trade, but his spirit, soaring above the 
occupation for which he was designed, from repining led him to resist, and from 
resisting, to rebel. He eloped from his friends, and contrived to enter the 
army. But, fond of the polite arts, and eager for the acquirement of knowledge, 
he found not this way of life much better adapted to his inclination than that 
from which he had escaped; he soon grew weary of it, was reconciled to his 
father, and entered at the Temple. But here, too volatile for serious study, 
and too gay for laborious application, he made little progress: and the same 
quickness of parts and vigour of imagination which united with prudence, or 
accompanied by judgment, might have raised him to the head of his profession, 
being unhappily associated with fickleness and caprice, served only to impede 
his improvement, and obstruct his preferment. And now, with little business, 
and that little neglected, a small fortune, and that fortune daily becoming 
less, the admiration of the world, but that admiration ending simply in 
civility, he lived an unsettled and unprofitable life, generally caressed, and 
universally sought, yet careless of his interest and thoughtless of the future; 
devoting his time to company, his income to dissipation, and his heart to the 
Muses.
"I bring you," said Mr Monckton, as he attended Cecilia into the room, "a 
subject of sorrow in a young lady who never gave disturbance to her friends but 
in quitting them."
"If sorrow," cried Mr Belfield, darting upon her his piercing eyes, "wears in 
your part of the world a form such as this, who would wish to change it for a 
view of joy?"
"She's divinely handsome, indeed!" cried the Captain, affecting an involuntary 
exclamation.
Meantime, Cecilia, who was placed next to the lady of the house, quietly began 
her breakfast; Mr Morrice, the young lawyer, with the most easy freedom, 
seating himself at her side, while Mr Monckton was elsewhere arranging the rest 
of his guests, in order to secure that place for himself.
Mr Morrice, without ceremony, attacked his fair neighbour; he talked of her 
journey, and the prospects of gaiety which it opened to her view; but by these 
finding her unmoved, he changed his theme, and expatiated upon the delights of 
the spot she was quitting. Studious to recommend himself to her notice, and 
indifferent by what means, one moment he flippantly extolled the entertainments 
of the town; and the next, rapturously described the charms of the country. A 
word, a look sufficed to mark her approbation or dissent, which he no sooner 
discovered, than he slided into her opinion, with as much facility and 
satisfaction as if it had originally been his own.
Mr Monckton, suppressing his chagrin, waited some time in expectation that when 
this young man saw he was standing, he would yield to him his chair: but the 
remark was not made, and the resignation was not thought of. The Captain, too, 
regarding the lady as his natural property for the morning, perceived with 
indignation by whom he was supplanted; while the company in general, saw with 
much surprize, the place they had severally foreborne to occupy from respect to 
their host, thus familiarly seized upon by the man who, in the whole room, had 
the least claim, either from age or rank, to consult nothing but his own 
inclination.
Mr Monckton, however, when he found that delicacy and good manners had no 
weight with his guest, thought it most expedient to allow them none with 
himself; and therefore, disguising his displeasure under an appearance of 
facetiousness, he called out, "Come, Morrice, you that love Christmas sports, 
what say you to the game of move-all?"
"I like it of all things!" answered Morrice, and starting from his chair, he 
skipped to another.
"So should I too," cried Mr Monckton, instantly taking his place, "were I to 
remove from any seat but this."
Morrice, though he felt himself outwitted, was the first to laugh, and seemed 
as happy in the change as Mr Monckton himself.
Mr Monckton now, addressing himself to Cecilia, said, "We are going to lose 
you, and you seem concerned at leaving us; yet, in a very few months you will 
forget Bury, forget its inhabitants, and forget its environs."
"If you think so," answered Cecilia, "must I not thence infer that Bury, its 
inhabitants, and its environs, will in a very few months forget me?"
"Ay, ay, and so much the better!" said Lady Margaret, muttering between her 
teeth, "so much the better!"
"I am sorry you think so, madam," cried Cecilia, colouring at her ill-breeding.
"You will find," said Mr Monckton, affecting the same ignorance of her meaning 
that Cecilia really felt, "as you mix with the world, you will find that Lady 
Margaret has but expressed what by almost every body is thought: to neglect old 
friends, and to court new acquaintance, though perhaps not yet avowedly 
delivered as a precept from parents to children, is nevertheless so universally 
recommended by example, that those who act differently, incur general censure 
for affecting singularity."
"It is happy then, for me," answered Cecilia, "that neither my actions nor 
myself will be sufficiently known to attract public observation."
"You intend, then, madam," said Mr Belfield, "in defiance of these maxims of 
the world, to be guided by the light of your own understanding."
"And such," returned Mr Monckton, "at first setting out in life, is the 
intention of every one. The closet reasoner is always refined in his 
sentiments, and always confident in his virtue; but when he mixes with the 
world, when he thinks less and acts more, he soon finds the necessity of 
accommodating himself to such customs as are already received, and of pursuing 
quietly the track that is already marked out."
"But not," exclaimed Mr Belfield, "if he has the least grain of spirit! the 
beaten track will be the last that a man of parts will deign to tread,
     For common rules were ne'er designed
     Directors of a noble mind."
"A pernicious maxim! a most pernicious maxim!" cried the old gentleman, who sat 
frowning in a corner of the room.
"Deviations from common rules," said Mr Monckton, without taking any notice of 
this interruption, "when they proceed from genius, are not merely pardonable, 
but admirable; and you, Belfield, have a peculiar right to plead their merits; 
but so little genius as there is in the world, you must surely grant that pleas 
of this sort are very rarely to be urged."
"And why rarely," cried Belfield, "but because your general rules, your 
appropriated customs, your settled forms, are but so many absurd arrangements 
to impede not merely the progress of genius, but the use of understanding? If 
man dared act for himself, if neither worldly views, contracted prejudices, 
eternal precepts, nor compulsive examples, swayed his better reason and 
impelled his conduct, how noble indeed would he be! how infinite in faculties! 
in apprehension how like a God!" {Footnote: Hamlet.}
"All this," answered Mr Monckton, "is but the doctrine of a lively imagination, 
that looks upon impossibilities simply as difficulties, and upon difficulties 
as mere invitations to victory. But experience teaches another lesson; 
experience shows that the opposition of an individual to a community is always 
dangerous in the operation, and seldom successful in the event;—never, 
indeed, without a concurrence strange as desirable, of fortunate circumstances 
with great abilities."
"And why is this," returned Belfield, "but because the attempt is so seldom 
made? The pitiful prevalence of general conformity extirpates genius, and 
murders originality; the man is brought up, not as if he were 'the noblest work 
of God,' but as a mere ductile machine of human formation: he is early taught 
that he must neither consult his understanding, nor pursue his inclinations, 
lest, unhappily for his commerce with the world, his understanding should be 
averse to fools, and provoke him to despise them; and his inclinations to the 
tyranny of perpetual restraint, and give him courage to abjure it."
"I am ready enough to allow," answered Mr Monckton, "that an eccentric genius, 
such, for example, as yours, may murmur at the tediousness of complying with 
the customs of the world, and wish, unconfined, and at large, to range through 
life without any settled plan or prudential restriction; but would you, 
therefore, grant the same licence to every one? would you wish to see the world 
peopled with defiers of order, and contemners of established forms? and not 
merely excuse the irregularities resulting from uncommon parts, but encourage 
those, also, to lead, who without blundering cannot even follow?"
"I would have all men," replied Belfield, "whether philosophers or ideots, act 
for themselves. Every one would then appear what he is; enterprize would be 
encouraged, and imitation abolished; genius would feel its superiority, and 
folly its insignificance; and then, and then only, should we cease to be 
surfeited with that eternal sameness of manner and appearance which at present 
runs through all ranks of men."
"Petrifying dull work this, mon ami!" said the Captain, in a whisper to 
Morrice, "de grace, start some new game."
"With all my heart," answered he; and then, suddenly jumping up, exclaimed, "A 
hare! a hare!"
"Where?—where?—which way?" and all the gentlemen arose, and ran to 
different windows, except the master of the house, the object of whose pursuit 
was already near him.
Morrice, with much pretended earnestness, flew from window to window, to trace 
footsteps upon the turf which he knew had not printed it: yet, never 
inattentive to his own interest, when he perceived in the midst of the 
combustion he had raised, that Lady Margaret was incensed at the noise it 
produced, he artfully gave over his search, and seating himself in a chair next 
to her, eagerly offered to assist her with cakes, chocolate, or whatever the 
table afforded.
He had, however, effectually broken up the conversation; and breakfast being 
over, Mr Harrel ordered his chaise, and Cecilia arose to take leave.
And now not without some difficulty could Mr Monckton disguise the uneasy fears 
which her departure occasioned him. Taking her hand, "I suppose," he said, "you 
will not permit an old friend to visit you in town, lest the sight of him 
should prove a disagreeable memorial of the time you will soon regret having 
wasted in the country?"
"Why will you say this, Mr Monckton?" cried Cecilia; "I am sure you cannot 
think it."
"These profound studiers of mankind, madam," said Belfield, "are mighty sorry 
champions for constancy or friendship. They wage war with all expectations but 
of depravity, and grant no quarter even to the purest designs, where they think 
there will be any temptation to deviate from them."
"Temptation," said Mr Monckton, "is very easy of resistance in theory; but if 
you reflect upon the great change of situation Miss Beverley will experience, 
upon the new scenes she will see, the new acquaintance she must make, and the 
new connections she may form, you will not wonder at the anxiety of a friend 
for her welfare."
"But I presume," cried Belfield, with a laugh, "Miss Beverley does not mean to 
convey her person to town, and leave her understanding locked up, with other 
natural curiosities, in the country? Why, therefore, may not the same 
discernment regulate her adoption of new acquaintance, and choice of new 
connections, that guided her selection of old ones? Do you suppose that because 
she is to take leave of you, she is to take leave of herself?"
"Where fortune smiles upon youth and beauty," answered Mr Monckton, "do you 
think it nothing that their fair possessor should make a sudden transition of 
situation from the quietness of a retired life in the country, to the gaiety of 
a splendid town residence?"
"Where fortune frowns upon youth and beauty," returned Belfield, "they may not 
irrationally excite commiseration; but where nature and chance unite their 
forces to bless the same object, what room there may be for alarm or 
lamentation I confess I cannot divine."
"What!" cried Mr Monckton, with some emotion, "are there not sharpers, 
fortune-hunters, sycophants, wretches of all sorts and denominations, who watch 
the approach of the rich and unwary, feed upon their inexperience, and prey 
upon their property?"
"Come, come," cried Mr Harrel, "it is time I should hasten my fair ward away, 
if this is your method of describing the place she is going to live in."
"Is it possible," cried the Captain, advancing to Cecilia, "that this lady has 
never yet tried the town?" and then, lowering his voice, and smiling 
languishingly in her face, he added, "Can anything so divinely handsome have 
been immured in the country? Ah! quelle honte! do you make it a principle to be 
so cruel?"
Cecilia, thinking such a compliment merited not any other notice than a slight 
bow, turned to Lady Margaret, and said, "Should your ladyship be in town this 
winter, may I expect the honour of hearing where I may wait upon you?"
"I don't know whether I shall go or not," answered the old lady, with her usual 
ungraciousness.
Cecilia would now have hastened away, but Mr Monckton, stopping her, again 
expressed his fears of the consequences of her journey; "Be upon your guard," 
he cried, "with all new acquaintance; judge nobody from appearances; form no 
friendship rashly; take time to look about you, and remember you can make no 
alteration in your way of life, without greater probability of faring worse, 
than chance of faring better. Keep therefore as you are, and the more you see 
of others, the more you will rejoice that you neither resemble nor are 
connected with them."
"This from you, Mr Monckton!" cried Belfield, "what is become of your 
conformity system? I thought all the world was to be alike, or only so much the 
worse for any variation?"
"I spoke," said Mr Monckton, "of the world in general, not of this lady in 
particular; and who that knows, who that sees her, would not wish it were 
possible she might continue in every respect exactly and unalterably what she 
is at present?"
"I find," said Cecilia, "you are determined that flattery at least, should I 
meet with it, shall owe no pernicious effects to its novelty."
"Well, Miss Beverley," cried Mr Harrel, "will you now venture to accompany me 
to town? Or has Mr Monckton frightened you from proceeding any farther?"
"If," replied Cecilia, "I felt no more sorrow in quitting my friends, than I 
feel terror in venturing to London, with how light a heart should I make the 
journey!"
"Brava!" cried Belfield, "I am happy to find the discourse of Mr Monckton has 
not intimidated you, nor prevailed upon you to deplore your condition in having 
the accumulated misery of being young, fair and affluent."
"Alas! poor thing!" exclaimed the old gentleman who sat in the corner, fixing 
his eyes upon Cecilia with an expression of mingled grief and pity.
Cecilia started, but no one else paid him any attention.
The usual ceremonies of leave-taking now followed, and the Captain, with most 
obsequious reverence, advanced to conduct Cecilia to the carriage; but in the 
midst of the dumb eloquence of his bows and smiles, Mr Morrice, affecting not 
to perceive his design, skipped gaily between them, and, without any previous 
formality, seized the hand of Cecilia himself; failing not, however, to temper 
the freedom of his action by a look of respect the most profound.
The Captain shrugged and retired. But Mr Monckton, enraged at his assurance, 
and determined it should nothing avail him, exclaimed, "Why how now, Morrice, 
do you take away the privilege of my house?"
"True, true;" answered Morrice, "you members of parliament have an undoubted 
right to be tenacious of your privileges." Then, bowing with a look of 
veneration to Cecilia, he resigned her hand with an air of as much happiness as 
he had taken it.
Mr Monckton, in leading her to the chaise, again begged permission to wait upon 
her in town: Mr Harrel took the hint, and entreated him to consider his house 
as his own; and Cecilia, gratefully thanking him for his solicitude in her 
welfare, added, "And I hope, sir, you will honour me with your counsel and 
admonitions with respect to my future conduct, whenever you have the goodness 
to let me see you."
This was precisely his wish. He begged, in return, that she would treat him 
with confidence, and then suffered the chaise to drive off.





