
As soon as they lost sight of the house, Cecilia expressed her surprise at the 
behaviour of the old gentleman who sat in the corner, whose general silence, 
seclusion from the company, and absence of mind, had strongly excited her 
curiosity.
Mr Harrel could give her very little satisfaction: he told her that he had 
twice or thrice met him in public places, where everybody remarked the 
singularity of his manners and appearance, but that he had never discoursed 
with anyone to whom he seemed known; and that he was as much surprised as 
herself in seeing so strange a character at the house of Mr Monckton.
The conversation then turned upon the family they had just quitted, and Cecilia 
warmly declared the good opinion she had of Mr Monckton, the obligations she 
owed to him for the interest which, from her childhood, he had always taken in 
her affairs; and her hopes of reaping much instruction from the friendship of a 
man who had so extensive a knowledge of the world.
Mr Harrel professed himself well satisfied that she should have such a 
counsellor; for though but little acquainted with him, he knew he was a man of 
fortune and fashion, and well esteemed in the world. They mutually 
compassionated his unhappy situation in domestic life, and Cecilia innocently 
expressed her concern at the dislike Lady Margaret seemed to have taken to her; 
a dislike which Mr Harrel naturally enough imputed to her youth and beauty, yet 
without suspecting any cause more cogent than a general jealousy of attractions 
of which she had herself so long outlived the possession.
As their journey drew near to its conclusion, all the uneasy and disagreeable 
sensations which in the bosom of Cecilia had accompanied its commencement, gave 
way to the expectation of quick approaching happiness in again meeting her 
favourite young friend.
Mrs Harrel had in childhood been her playmate, and in youth her school-fellow; 
a similarity of disposition with respect to sweetness of temper, had early 
rendered them dear to each other, though the resemblance extended no farther, 
Mrs Harrel having no pretensions to the wit or understanding of her friend; but 
she was amiable and obliging, and therefore sufficiently deserving affection, 
though neither blazing with attractions which laid claim to admiration, nor 
endowed with those superior qualities which mingle respect in the love they 
inspire.
From the time of her marriage, which was near three years, she had entirely 
quitted Suffolk, and had had no intercourse with Cecilia but by letter. She was 
now just returned from Violet Bank, the name given by Mr Harrel to a villa 
about twelve miles from London, where with a large party of company she had 
spent the Christmas holidays.
Their meeting was tender and affectionate; the sensibility of Cecilia's heart 
flowed from her eyes, and the gladness of Mrs Harrel's dimpled her cheeks.
As soon as their mutual salutations, expressions of kindness, and general 
inquiries had been made, Mrs Harrel begged to lead her to the drawing-room, 
"where," she added, "you will see some of my friends, who are impatient to be 
presented to you."
"I could have wished," said Cecilia, "after so long an absence, to have passed 
this first evening alone with you."
"They are all people who particularly desired to see you," she answered, "and I 
had them by way of entertaining you, as I was afraid you would be out of 
spirits at leaving Bury."
Cecilia, finding the kindness of her intentions, forbore any further 
expostulation, and quietly followed her to the drawing-room. But as the door 
was opened, she was struck with amazement upon finding that the apartment, 
which was spacious, lighted with brilliancy, and decorated with magnificence, 
was more than half filled with company, every one of which was dressed with 
gaiety and profusion.
Cecilia, who from the word friends, expected to have seen a small and private 
party, selected for the purpose of social converse, started involuntarily at 
the sight before her, and had hardly courage to proceed.
Mrs Harrel, however, took her hand and introduced her to the whole company, who 
were all severally named to her; a ceremonial which though not merely agreeable 
but even necessary to those who live in the gay world, in order to obviate 
distressing mistakes, or unfortunate implications in discourse, would by 
Cecilia have been willingly dispensed with, since to her their names were as 
new as their persons, and since knowing nothing of their histories, parties or 
connections, she could to nothing allude: it therefore served but to heighten 
her colour and increase her embarrassment.
A native dignity of mind, however, which had early taught her to distinguish 
modesty from bashfulness, enabled her in a short time to conquer her surprise, 
and recover her composure. She entreated Mrs Harrel to apologise for her 
appearance, and being seated between two young ladies, endeavoured to seem 
reconciled to it herself.
Nor was this very difficult; for while her dress, which she had not changed 
since her journey, joined to the novelty of her face, attracted general 
observation, the report of her fortune, which had preceded her entrance, 
secured to her general respect. She soon found, too, that a company was not 
necessarily formidable because full dressed, that familiarity could be united 
with magnificence, and that though to her, every one seemed attired to walk in 
a procession, or to grace a drawing-room, no formality was assumed, and no 
solemnity was affected: every one was without restraint, even rank obtained but 
little distinction; ease was the general plan, and entertainment the general 
pursuit.
Cecilia, though new to London, which city the ill-health of her uncle had 
hitherto prevented her seeing, was yet no stranger to company; she had passed 
her time in retirement, but not in obscurity, since for some years past she had 
presided at the table of the Dean, who was visited by the first people of the 
county in which he lived: and notwithstanding his parties, which were frequent 
though small, and elegant though private, had not prepared her for the 
splendour or the diversity of a London assembly, they yet, by initiating her in 
the practical rules of good breeding, had taught her to subdue the timid fears 
of total inexperience, and to repress the bashful feelings of shamefaced 
awkwardness; fears and feelings which rather call for compassion than 
admiration, and which, except in extreme youth, serve but to degrade the 
modesty they indicate.
She regarded, therefore, the two young ladies between whom she was seated, 
rather with a wish of addressing, than a shyness of being attacked by them; but 
the elder, Miss Larolles, was earnestly engaged in discourse with a gentleman, 
and the younger, Miss Leeson, totally discouraged her, by the invariable 
silence and gravity with which from time to time she met her eyes.
Uninterrupted, therefore, except by occasional speeches from Mr and Mrs Harrel, 
she spent the first part of the evening merely in surveying the company.
Nor was the company dilatory in returning her notice, since from the time of 
her entrance into the room, she had been the object of general regard.
The ladies took an exact inventory of her dress, and internally settled how 
differently they would have been attired if blessed with equal affluence.
The men disputed among themselves whether or not she was painted; and one of 
them asserting boldly that she rouged well, a debate ensued, which ended in a 
bet, and the decision was mutually agreed to depend upon the colour of her 
cheeks by the beginning of April, when, if unfaded by bad hours and continual 
dissipation, they wore the same bright bloom with which they were now glowing, 
her champion acknowledged that his wager would be lost.
In about half an hour the gentleman with whom Miss Larolles had been talking, 
left the room, and then that young lady, turning suddenly to Cecilia, 
exclaimed, "How odd Mr Meadows is! Do you know, he says he shan't be well 
enough to go to Lady Nyland's assembly! How ridiculous! as if that could hurt 
him."
Cecilia, surprised at an attack so little ceremonious, lent her a civil, but 
silent attention.
"You shall be there, shan't you?" she added.
"No, ma'am, I have not the honour of being at all known to her ladyship."
"Oh, there's nothing in that," returned she, "for Mrs Harrel can acquaint her 
you are here, and then, you know, she'll send you a ticket, and then you can 
go."
"A ticket?" repeated Cecilia, "does Lady Nyland only admit her company with 
tickets?"
"Oh, lord!" cried Miss Larolles, laughing immoderately, "don't you know what I 
mean? Why, a ticket is only a visiting card, with a name upon it; but we all 
call them tickets now."
Cecilia thanked her for the information, and then Miss Larolles enquired how 
many miles she had travelled since morning?
"Seventy-three," answered Cecilia, "which I hope will plead my apology for 
being so little dressed."
"Oh, you're vastly well," returned the other, "and for my part, I never think 
about dress. But only conceive what happened to me last year! Do you know I 
came to town the twentieth of March! was not that horrid provoking?"
"Perhaps so," said Cecilia, "but I am sure I cannot tell why."
"Not tell why?" repeated Miss Larolles, "why, don't you know it was the very 
night of the grand private masquerade at Lord Darien's? I would not have missed 
it for the whole universe. I never travelled in such an agony in my life: we 
did not get to town till monstrous late, and then do you know I had neither a 
ticket nor a habit! Only conceive what a distress! well, I sent to every 
creature I knew for a ticket, but they all said there was not one to be had; so 
I was just like a mad creature—but about ten or eleven o'clock, a young lady 
of my particular acquaintance, by the greatest good luck in the world happened 
to be taken suddenly ill; so she sent me her ticket,—was not that delightful?"
"For her, extremely!" said Cecilia, laughing.
"Well," she continued, "then I was almost out of my wits with joy; and I went 
about, and got one of the sweetest dresses you ever saw. If you'll call upon me 
some morning, I'll shew it you."
Cecilia, not prepared for an invitation so abrupt, bowed without speaking, and 
Miss Larolles, too happy in talking herself to be offended at the silence of 
another, continued her narration.
"Well, but now comes the vilest part of the business; do you know, when 
everything else was ready, I could not get my hair-dresser! I sent all over the 
town,—he was nowhere to be found; I thought I should have died with vexation; 
I assure you I cried so that if I had not gone in a mask, I should have been 
ashamed to be seen. And so, after all this monstrous fatigue, I was forced to 
have my hair dressed by my own maid, quite in a common way; was not it cruelly 
mortifying?"
"Why yes," answered Cecilia, "I should think it was almost sufficient to make 
you regret the illness of the young lady who sent you her ticket."
They were now interrupted by Mrs Harrel, who advanced to them followed by a 
young man of a serious aspect and modest demeanour, and said, "I am happy to 
see you both so well engaged; but my brother has been reproaching me with 
presenting everybody to Miss Beverley but himself."
"I cannot hope," said Mr Arnott, "that I have any place in the recollection of 
Miss Beverley, but long as I have been absent from Suffolk, and unfortunate as 
I was in not seeing her during my last visit there, I am yet sure, even at this 
distance of time, grown and formed as she is, I should instantly have known 
her."
"Amazing!" cried an elderly gentleman, in a tone of irony, who was standing 
near them, "for the face is a very common one!"
"I remember well," said Cecilia, "that when you left Suffolk I thought I had 
lost my best friend."
"Is that possible?" cried Mr Arnott, with a look of much delight.
"Yes, indeed, and not without reason, for in all disputes you were my advocate; 
in all plays, my companion; and in all difficulties, my assistant."
"Madam," cried the same gentleman, "if you liked him because he was your 
advocate, companion, and assistant, pray like me too, for I am ready to become 
all three at once."
"You are very good," said Cecilia, laughing, "but at present I find no want of 
any defender."
"That's pity," he returned, "for Mr Arnott seems to me very willing to act the 
same parts over again with you."
"But for that purpose he must return to the days of his childhood."
"Ah, would to heaven it were possible!" cried Mr Arnott, "for they were the 
happiest of my life."
"After such a confession," said his companion, "surely you will let him attempt 
to renew them? 'tis but taking a walk backwards; and though it is very early in 
life for Mr Arnott to sigh for that retrograde motion, which, in the regular 
course of things, we shall all in our turns desire, yet with such a motive as 
recovering Miss Beverley for a playfellow, who can wonder that he anticipates 
in youth the hopeless wishes of age?"
Here Miss Larolles, who was one of that numerous tribe of young ladies to whom 
all conversation is irksome in which they are not themselves engaged, quitted 
her place, of which Mr Gosport, Cecilia's new acquaintance, immediately took 
possession.
"Is it utterly impossible," continued this gentleman, "that I should assist in 
procuring Mr Arnott such a renovation? Is there no subaltern part I can perform 
to facilitate the project? for I will either hide or seek with any boy in the 
parish; and for a Q in the corner, there is none more celebrated."
"I have no doubt, sir," answered Cecilia, "of your accomplishments; and I 
should be not a little entertained with the surprize of the company if you 
could persuade yourself to display them."
"And what," cried he, "could the company do half so well as to rise also, and 
join in the sport? it would but interrupt some tale of scandal, or some 
description of a toupee. Active wit, however despicable when compared with 
intellectual, is yet surely better than the insignificant click-clack of modish 
conversation," casting his eyes towards Miss Larolles, "or even the pensive 
dullness of affected silence," changing their direction towards Miss Leeson.
Cecilia, though surprised at an attack upon the society her friend had 
selected, by one who was admitted to make a part of it, felt its justice too 
strongly to be offended at its severity.
"I have often wished," he continued, "that when large parties are collected, as 
here, without any possible reason why they might not as well be separated, 
something could be proposed in which each person might innocently take a share: 
for surely after the first half-hour, they can find little new to observe in 
the dress of their neighbours, or to display in their own; and with whatever 
seeming gaiety they may contrive to fill up the middle and end of the evening, 
by wire-drawing the comments afforded by the beginning, they are yet so 
miserably fatigued, that if they have not four or five places to run to every 
night, they suffer nearly as much from weariness of their friends in company, 
as they would do from weariness of themselves in solitude."
Here, by the general breaking up of the party, the conversation was 
interrupted, and Mr Gosport was obliged to make his exit; not much to the 
regret of Cecilia, who was impatient to be alone with Mrs Harrel.
The rest of the evening, therefore, was spent much more to her satisfaction; it 
was devoted to friendship, to mutual enquiries, to kind congratulations, and 
endearing recollections; and though it was late when she retired, she retired 
with reluctance.





