
Eager to renew a conversation which had afforded her so much pleasure, Cecilia, 
neither sensible of fatigue from her change of hours nor her journey, arose 
with the light, and as soon as she was dressed, hastened to the breakfast 
apartment.
She had not, however, been more impatient to enter than she soon became to quit 
it; for though not much surprized to find herself there before her friend, her 
ardour for waiting her arrival was somewhat chilled, upon finding the fire but 
just lighted, the room cold, and the servants still employed in putting it in 
order.
At 10 o'clock she made another attempt: the room was then better prepared for 
her reception, but still it was empty. Again she was retiring, when the 
appearance of Mr Arnott stopped her.
He expressed his surprize at her early rising, in a manner that marked the 
pleasure it gave to him; and then, returning to the conversation of the 
preceding evening, he expatiated with warmth and feeling upon the happiness of 
his boyish days, remembered every circumstance belonging to the plays in which 
they had formerly been companions, and dwelt upon every incident with a 
minuteness of delight that shewed his unwillingness ever to have done with the 
subject.
This discourse detained her till they were joined by Mrs Harrel, and then 
another, more gay and more general succeeded to it.
During their breakfast, Miss Larolles was announced as a visitor to Cecilia, to 
whom she immediately advanced with the intimacy of an old acquaintance, taking 
her hand, and assuring her she could no longer defer the honour of waiting upon 
her.
Cecilia, much amazed at this warmth of civility from one to whom she was almost 
a stranger, received her compliment rather coldly; but Miss Larolles, without 
consulting her looks, or attending to her manner, proceeded to express the 
earnest desire she had long had to be known to her; to hope they should meet 
very often; to declare nothing could make her so happy; and to beg leave to 
recommend to her notice her own milliner.
"I assure you," she continued, "she has all Paris in her disposal; the sweetest 
caps! the most beautiful trimmings! and her ribbons are quite divine! It is the 
most dangerous thing you can conceive to go near her; I never trust myself in 
her room but I am sure to be ruined. If you please, I'll take you to her this 
morning."
"If her acquaintance is so ruinous," said Cecilia, "I think I had better avoid 
it."
"Oh, impossible! there's no such thing as living without her. To be sure she's 
shockingly dear, that I must own; but then who can wonder? She makes such sweet 
things, 'tis impossible to pay her too much for them."
Mrs Harrel now joining in the recommendation, the party was agreed upon, and 
accompanied by Mr Arnott, the ladies proceeded to the house of the milliner.
Here the raptures of Miss Larolles were again excited: she viewed the finery 
displayed with delight inexpressible, enquired who were the intended 
possessors, heard their names with envy, and sighed with all the bitterness of 
mortification that she was unable to order home almost everything she looked at.
Having finished their business here, they proceeded to various other dress 
manufacturers, in whose praises Miss Larolles was almost equally eloquent, and 
to appropriate whose goods she was almost equally earnest: and then, after 
attending this loquacious young lady to her father's house, Mrs Harrel and 
Cecilia returned to their own.
Cecilia rejoiced at the separation, and congratulated herself that the rest of 
the day might be spent alone with her friend.
"Why, no," said Mrs Harrel, "not absolutely alone, for I expect some company at 
night."
"Company again to-night?"
"Nay, don't be frightened, for it will be a very small party; not more than 
fifteen or twenty in all."
"Is that so small a party?" said Cecilia, smiling; "and how short a time since 
would you, as well as I, have reckoned it a large one!"
"Oh, you mean when I lived in the country," returned Mrs Harrel; "but what in 
the world could I know of parties or company then?"
"Not much, indeed," said Cecilia, "as my present ignorance shews."
They then parted to dress for dinner.
The company of this evening were again all strangers to Cecilia, except Miss 
Leeson, who was seated next to her, and whose frigid looks again compelled her 
to observe the same silence she so resolutely practised herself. Yet not the 
less was her internal surprise that a lady who seemed determined neither to 
give nor receive any entertainment, should repeatedly chuse to show herself in 
a company with no part of which she associated.
Mr Arnott, who contrived to occupy the seat on her other side, suffered not the 
silence with which her fair neighbour had infected her to spread any further: 
he talked, indeed, upon no new subject; and upon the old one, of their former 
sports and amusements, he had already exhausted all that was worth being 
mentioned; but not yet had he exhausted the pleasure he received from the 
theme; it seemed always fresh and always enchanting to him; it employed his 
thoughts, regaled his imagination, and enlivened his discourse. Cecilia in vain 
tried to change it for another; he quitted it only by compulsion, and returned 
to it with redoubled eagerness.
When the company was retired, and Mr Arnott only remained with the ladies, 
Cecilia, with no little surprise, inquired for Mr Harrel, observing that she 
had not seen him the whole day.
"O!" cried his lady, "don't think of wondering at that, for it happens 
continually. He dines at home, indeed, in general, but otherwise I should see 
nothing of him at all."
"Indeed? why, how does he fill up his time?"
"That I am sure I cannot tell, for he never consults me about it; but I suppose 
much in the same way that other people do."
"Ah, Priscilla!" cried Cecilia, with some earnestness, "how little did I ever 
expect to see you so much a fine lady!"
"A fine lady?" repeated Mrs Harrel; "why, what is it I do? Don't I live exactly 
like every body else that mixes at all with the world?"
"You, Miss Beverley," said Mr Arnott in a low voice, "will I hope give to the 
world an example, not take one from it."
Soon after, they separated for the night.
The next morning, Cecilia took care to fill up her time more advantageously, 
than in wandering about the house in search of a companion she now expected not 
to find: she got together her books, arranged them to her fancy, and secured to 
herself for the future occupation of her leisure hours, the exhaustless fund of 
entertainment which reading, that richest, highest, and noblest source of 
intellectual enjoyment, perpetually affords.
While they were yet at breakfast, they were again visited by Miss Larolles. "I 
am come," cried she, eagerly, "to run away with you both to my Lord Belgrade's 
sale. All the world will be there; and we shall go in with tickets, and you 
have no notion how it will be crowded."
"What is to be sold there?" said Cecilia.
"Oh, every thing you can conceive; house, stables, china, laces, horses, caps, 
everything in the world."
"And do you intend to buy any thing?"
"Lord, no; but one likes to see the people's things."
Cecilia then begged they would excuse her attendance.
"O, by no means!" cried Miss Larolles; "you must go, I assure you; there'll be 
such a monstrous crowd as you never saw in your life. I dare say we shall be 
half squeezed to death."
"That," said Cecilia, "is an inducement which you must not expect will have 
much weight with a poor rustic just out of the country: it must require all the 
polish of a long residence in the metropolis to make it attractive."
"O but do go, for I assure you it will be the best sale we shall have this 
season. I can't imagine, Mrs Harrel, what poor Lady Belgrade will do with 
herself; I hear the creditors have seized every thing; I really believe 
creditors are the cruelest set of people in the world! they have taken those 
beautiful buckles out of her shoes! Poor soul! I declare it will make my heart 
ache to see them put up. It's quite shocking, upon my word. I wonder who'll buy 
them. I assure you they were the prettiest fancied I ever saw. But come, if we 
don't go directly, there will be no getting in."
Cecilia again desired to be excused accompanying them, adding that she wished 
to spend the day at home.
"At home, my dear?" cried Mrs Harrel; "why we have been engaged to Mrs Mears 
this month, and she begged me to prevail with you to be of the party. I expect 
she'll call, or send you a ticket, every moment."
"How unlucky for me," said Cecilia, "that you should happen to have so many 
engagements just at this time! I hope, at least, there will not be any for 
to-morrow."
"O yes; to-morrow we go to Mrs Elton's."
"Again to-morrow? and how long is this to last?"
"O, heaven knows; I'll shew you my catalogue."
She then produced a book which contained a list of engagements for more than 
three weeks. "And as these," she said, "are struck off, new ones are made; and 
so it is we go on till after the birth-day."
When this list had been examined and commented upon by Miss Larolles, and 
viewed and wondered at by Cecilia, it was restored to its place, the two ladies 
went together to the auction, permitting Cecilia, at her repeated request, to 
return to her own apartment.
She returned, however, neither satisfied with the behaviour of her friend, nor 
pleased with her own situation: the sobriety of her education, as it had early 
instilled into her mind the pure dictates of religion, and strict principles of 
honour, had also taught her to regard continual dissipation as an introduction 
to vice, and unbounded extravagance as the harbinger of injustice. Long 
accustomed to see Mrs Harrel in the same retirement in which she had hitherto 
lived herself, when books were their first amusement, and the society of each 
other was their chief happiness, the change she now perceived in her mind and 
manners equally concerned and surprised her. She found her insensible to 
friendship, indifferent to her husband, and negligent of all social felicity. 
Dress, company, parties of pleasure, and public places, seemed not merely to 
occupy all her time; but to gratify all her wishes. Cecilia, in whose heart 
glowed the warmest affections and most generous virtue, was cruelly depressed 
and mortified by this disappointment; yet she had the good sense to determine 
against upbraiding her, well aware that if reproach has any power over 
indifference, it is only that of changing it into aversion.
Mrs Harrel, in truth, was innocent of heart, though dissipated in life; married 
very young, she had made an immediate transition from living in a private 
family and a country town, to becoming mistress of one of the most elegant 
houses in Portman-square, at the head of a splendid fortune, and wife to a man 
whose own pursuits soon showed her the little value he himself set upon 
domestic happiness. Immersed in the fashionable round of company and 
diversions, her understanding, naturally weak, was easily dazzled by the 
brilliancy of her situation; greedily, therefore, sucking in air impregnated 
with luxury and extravagance, she had soon no pleasure but to vie with some 
rival in elegance, and no ambition but to exceed some superior in expence.
The Dean of——in naming Mr Harrel for one of the guardians of his niece, had 
no other view than that of indulging her wishes by allowing her to reside in 
the house of her friend: he had little personal knowledge of him, but was 
satisfied with the nomination, because acquainted with his family, fortune, and 
connections, all which persuaded him to believe without further enquiry, that 
it was more peculiarly proper for his niece than any other he could make.
In his choice of the other two trustees he had been more prudent; the first of 
these, the honourable Mr Delvile, was a man of high birth and character; the 
second, Mr Briggs, had spent his whole life in business, in which he had 
already amassed an immense fortune, and had still no greater pleasure than that 
of encreasing it. From the high honour, therefore, of Mr Delvile, he expected 
the most scrupulous watchfulness that his niece should in nothing be injured, 
and from the experience of Mr Briggs in money matters, and his diligence in 
transacting business, he hoped for the most vigilant observance that her 
fortune, while under his care, should be turned to the best account. And thus, 
as far as he was able, he had equally consulted her pleasure, her security, and 
her pecuniary advantage.
Mrs Harrel returned home only in time to dress for the rest of the day.
When Cecilia was summoned to dinner, she found, besides her host and hostess 
and Mr Arnott, a gentleman she had not before seen, but who as soon as she 
entered the parlour, Mr Harrel presented to her, saying at the same time he was 
one of the most intimate of his friends.
This gentleman, Sir Robert Floyer, was about thirty years of age; his face was 
neither remarkable for its beauty nor its ugliness, but sufficiently 
distinguished by its expression of invincible assurance; his person, too, 
though neither striking for its grace nor its deformity, attracted notice from 
the insolence of his deportment. His manners, haughty and supercilious, marked 
the high opinion he cherished of his own importance; and his air and address, 
at once bold and negligent, announced his happy perfection in the character at 
which he aimed, that of an accomplished man of the town.
The moment Cecilia appeared, she became the object of his attention, though 
neither with the look of admiration due to her beauty, nor yet with that of 
curiosity excited by her novelty, but with the scrutinizing observation of a 
man on the point of making a bargain, who views with fault-seeking eyes the 
property he means to cheapen.
Cecilia, wholly unused to an examination so little ceremonious, shrunk abashed 
from his regards: but his conversation was not less displeasing to her than his 
looks; his principal subjects, which were horse-racing, losses at play, and 
disputes at gaming-tables, could afford her but little amusement, because she 
could not understand them; and the episodes with which they were occasionally 
interspersed, consisting chiefly of comparative strictures upon celebrated 
beauties, hints of impending bankruptcies, and witticisms upon recent divorces, 
were yet more disagreeable to her, because more intelligible. Wearied, 
therefore, with uninteresting anecdotes, and offended with injudicious subjects 
of pleasantry, she waited with impatience for the moment of retiring; but Mrs 
Harrel, less eager, because better entertained, was in no haste to remove, and 
therefore she was compelled to remain quiet, till they were both obliged to 
arise, in order to fulfil their engagement with Mrs Mears.
As they went together to the house of that lady, in Mrs Harrel's vis-a-vis, 
Cecilia, not doubting but their opinions concerning the Baronet would accord, 
instantly and openly declared her disapprobation of every thing he had uttered; 
but Mrs Harrel, far from confirming her expectations, only said, "I am sorry 
you don't like him, for he is almost always with us?"
"Do you like him, then, yourself?"
"Extremely; he is very entertaining and clever, and knows the world."
"How judiciously do you praise him!" cried Cecilia; "and how long might you 
deliberate before you could add another word to his panegyric!"
Mrs Harrel, satisfied to commend, without even attempting to vindicate him, was 
soon content to change the subject; and Cecilia, though much concerned that the 
husband of her friend had made so disgraceful an election of a favourite, yet 
hoped that the lenity of Mrs Harrel resulted from her desire to excuse his 
choice, not from her own approbation.





