
The house of Mr Delvile was grand and spacious, fitted up not with modern 
taste, but with the magnificence of former times; the servants were all 
veterans, gorgeous in their liveries, and profoundly respectful in their 
manners; every thing had an air of state, but of a state so gloomy, that while 
it inspired awe, it repressed pleasure.
Cecilia sent in her name and was admitted without difficulty, and was then 
ushered with great pomp through sundry apartments, and rows of servants, before 
she came into the presence of Mr Delvile.
He received her with an air of haughty affability which, to a spirit open and 
liberal as that of Cecilia, could not fail being extremely offensive; but too 
much occupied with the care of his own importance to penetrate into the 
feelings of another, he attributed the uneasiness which his reception 
occasioned to the overawing predominance of superior rank and consequence.
He ordered a servant to bring her a chair, while he only half rose from his own 
upon her entering into the room; then, waving his hand and bowing, with a 
motion that desired her to be seated, he said, "I am very happy, Miss Beverley, 
that you have found me alone; you would rarely have had the same good fortune. 
At this time of day I am generally in a crowd. People of large connections have 
not much leisure in London, especially if they see a little after their own 
affairs, and if their estates, like mine, are dispersed in various parts of the 
kingdom. However, I am glad it happened so. And I am glad, too, that you have 
done me the favour of calling without waiting till I sent, which I really would 
have done as soon as I heard of your arrival, but that the multiplicity of my 
engagements allowed me no respite."
A display of importance so ostentatious made Cecilia already half repent her 
visit, satisfied that the hope in which she had planned it would be fruitless.
Mr Delvile, still imputing to embarrassment, an inquietude of countenance that 
proceeded merely from disappointment, imagined her veneration was every moment 
increasing; and therefore, pitying a timidity which both gratified and softened 
him, and equally pleased with himself for inspiring, and with her for feeling 
it, he abated more and more of his greatness, till he became, at length, so 
infinitely condescending, with intention to give her courage, that he totally 
depressed her with mortification and chagrin.
After some general inquiries concerning her way of life, he told her that he 
hoped she was contented with her situation at the Harrels, adding, "If you have 
any thing to complain of, remember to whom you may appeal." He then asked if 
she had seen Mr Briggs?
"Yes, sir, I am this moment come from his house."
"I am sorry for it; his house cannot be a proper one for the reception of a 
young lady. When the Dean made application that I would be one of your 
guardians, I instantly sent him a refusal, as is my custom upon all such 
occasions, which indeed occur to me with a frequency extremely importunate: but 
the Dean was a man for whom I had really a regard, and, therefore, when I found 
my refusal had affected him, I suffered myself to be prevailed upon to indulge 
him, contrary not only to my general rule, but to my inclination."
Here he stopt, as if to receive some compliment, but Cecilia, very little 
disposed to pay him any, went no farther than an inclination of the head.
"I knew not, however," he continued, "at the time I was induced to give my 
consent, with whom I was to be associated; nor could I have imagined the Dean 
so little conversant with the distinctions of the world, as to disgrace me with 
inferior coadjutors: but the moment I learnt the state of the affair, I 
insisted upon withdrawing both my name and countenance."
Here again he paused; not in expectation of an answer from Cecilia, but merely 
to give her time to marvel in what manner he had at last been melted.
"The Dean," he resumed, "was then very ill; my displeasure, I believe, hurt 
him. I was sorry for it; he was a worthy man, and had not meant to offend me; 
in the end, I accepted his apology, and was even persuaded to accept the 
office. You have a right, therefore, to consider yourself as personally my 
ward, and though I do not think proper to mix much with your other guardians, I 
shall always be ready to serve and advise you, and much pleased to see you."
"You do me honour, sir," said Cecilia, extremely wearied of such graciousness, 
and rising to be gone.
"Pray sit still," said he, with a smile; "I have not many engagements for this 
morning. You must give me some account how you pass your time. Are you much 
out? The Harrels, I am told, live at a great expense. What is their 
establishment?"
"I don't exactly know, sir."
"They are decent sort of people, I believe; are they not?"
"I hope so, sir!"
"And they have a tolerable acquaintance, I believe: I am told so; for I know 
nothing of them."
"They have, at least, a very numerous one, sir."
"Well, my dear," said he, taking her hand, "now you have once ventured to come, 
don't be apprehensive of repeating your visits. I must introduce you to Mrs 
Delvile; I am sure she will be happy to shew you any kindness. Come, therefore, 
when you please, and without scruple. I would call upon you myself, but am 
fearful of being embarrassed by the people with whom you live."
He then rang his bell, and with the same ceremonies which had attended her 
admittance, she was conducted back to her carriage.
And here died away all hope of putting into execution, during her minority, the 
plan of which the formation had given her so much pleasure. She found that her 
present situation, however wide of her wishes, was by no means the most 
disagreeable in which she could be placed; she was tired, indeed, of 
dissipation, and shocked at the sight of unfeeling extravagance; but 
notwithstanding the houses of each of her other guardians were exempt from 
these particular vices, she saw not any prospect of happiness with either of 
them; vulgarity seemed leagued with avarice to drive her from the mansion of Mr 
Briggs, and haughtiness with ostentation to exclude her from that of Mr Delvile.
She came back, therefore, to Portman Square, disappointed in her hopes, and 
sick both of those whom she quitted and of those to whom she was returning; but 
in going to her own apartment Mrs Harrel, eagerly stopping her, begged she 
would come into the drawing-room, where she promised her a most agreeable 
surprise.
Cecilia, for an instant, imagined that some old acquaintance was just arrived 
out of the country; but, upon her entrance, she saw only Mr Harrel and some 
workmen, and found that the agreeable surprise was to proceed from the sight of 
an elegant Awning, prepared for one of the inner apartments, to be fixed over a 
long desert-table, which was to be ornamented with various devices of cut glass.
"Did you ever see any thing so beautiful in your life?" cried Mrs Harrel; "and 
when the table is covered with the coloured ices and those sort of things, it 
will be as beautiful again. We shall have it ready for Tuesday se'nnight.
"I understood you were engaged to go to the Masquerade?"
"So we shall; only we intend to see masks at home first."
"I have some thoughts," said Mr Harrel, leading the way to another small room, 
"of running up a flight of steps and a little light gallery here, and so making 
a little Orchestra. What would such a thing come to, Mr Tomkins?"
"O, a trifle, sir," answered Mr Tomkins, "a mere nothing."
"Well, then, give orders for it, and let it be done directly. I don't care how 
slight it is, but pray let it be very elegant. Won't it be a great addition, 
Miss Beverley?"
"Indeed, sir, I don't think it seems to be very necessary," said Cecilia, who 
wished much to take that moment for reminding him of the debt he had contracted 
with Mr Arnott.
"Lord, Miss Beverley is so grave!" cried Mrs Harrel; "nothing of this sort 
gives her any pleasure."
"She has indeed," answered Cecilia, trying to smile, "not much taste for the 
pleasure of being always surrounded by workmen."
And, as soon as she was able, she retired to her room, feeling, both on the 
part of Mr Arnott and the Hills, a resentment at the injustice of Mr Harrel, 
which fixed her in the resolution of breaking through that facility of 
compliance, which had hitherto confined her disapprobation to her own breast, 
and venturing, henceforward, to mark the opinion she entertained of his conduct 
by consulting nothing but reason and principle in her own.
Her first effort towards this change was made immediately, in begging to be 
excused from accompanying Mrs Harrel to a large card assembly that evening.
Mrs Harrel, extremely surprised, asked a thousand times the reason of her 
refusal, imagining it to proceed from some very extraordinary cause; nor was 
she, without the utmost difficulty, persuaded at last that she merely meant to 
pass one evening by herself.
But the next day, when the refusal was repeated, she was still more 
incredulous; it seemed to her impossible that any one who had the power to be 
encircled with company, could by choice spend a second afternoon alone: and she 
was so urgent in her request to be entrusted with the secret, that Cecilia 
found no way left to appease her, but by frankly confessing she was weary of 
eternal visiting, and sick of living always in a crowd.
"Suppose, then," cried she, "I send for Miss Larolles to come and sit with you?"
Cecilia, not without laughing, declined this proposal, assuring her that no 
such assistant was necessary for her entertainment: yet it was not till after a 
long contention that she was able to convince her there would be no cruelty in 
leaving her by herself.
The following day, however, her trouble diminished; for Mrs Harrel, ceasing to 
be surprised, thought little more of the matter, and forbore any earnestness of 
solicitation: and, from that time, she suffered her to follow her own humour 
with very little opposition. Cecilia was much concerned to find her so unmoved; 
and not less disappointed at the indifference of Mr Harrel, who, being seldom 
of the same parties with his lady, and seeing her too rarely either to 
communicate or hear any domestic occurrences, far from being struck, as she had 
hoped, with the new way in which she passed her time, was scarce sensible of 
the change, and interfered not upon the subject.
Sir Robert Floyer, who continued to see her when he dined in Portman Square, 
often enquired what she did with herself in an evening; but never obtaining any 
satisfactory answer, he concluded her engagements were with people to whom he 
was a stranger.
Poor Mr Arnott felt the cruellest disappointment in being deprived of the 
happiness of attending her in her evening's expeditions, when, whether he 
conversed with her or not, he was sure of the indulgence of seeing and hearing 
her.
But the greatest sufferer from this new regulation was Mr Monckton, who, unable 
any longer to endure the mortifications of which his morning visits to Portman 
Square had been productive, determined not to trust his temper with such 
provocations in future, but rather to take his chance of meeting with her 
elsewhere: for which purpose, he assiduously frequented all public places, and 
sought acquaintance with every family and every person he believed to be known 
to the Harrels: but his patience was unrewarded, and his diligence 
unsuccessful; he met with her no where, and, while he continued his search, 
fancied every evil power was at work to lead him whither he was sure never to 
find her.
Meanwhile Cecilia passed her time greatly to her own satisfaction. Her first 
care was to assist and comfort the Hills. She went herself to their lodgings, 
ordered and paid for whatever the physician prescribed to the sick man, gave 
clothes to the children, and money and various necessaries to the wife. She 
found that the poor carpenter was not likely to languish much longer, and 
therefore, for the present, only thought of alleviating his sufferings, by 
procuring him such indulgences as were authorised by his physician, and 
enabling his family to abate so much of their labour as was requisite for 
obtaining time to nurse and attend him: but she meant, as soon as the last 
duties should be paid him, to assist his survivors in attempting to follow some 
better and more profitable business.
Her next solicitude was to furnish herself with a well-chosen collection of 
books: and this employment, which to a lover of literature, young and ardent in 
its pursuit, is perhaps the mind's first luxury, proved a source of 
entertainment so fertile and delightful that it left her nothing to wish.
She confined not her acquisitions to the limits of her present power, but, as 
she was laying in a stock for future as well as immediate advantage, she was 
restrained by no expence from gratifying her taste and her inclination. She had 
now entered the last year of her minority, and therefore had not any doubt that 
her guardians would permit her to take up whatever sum she should require for 
such a purpose.
And thus, in the exercise of charity, the search of knowledge, and the 
enjoyment of quiet, serenely in innocent philosophy passed the hours of Cecilia.





