
Cecilia found Mrs Harrel eagerly waiting to hear some account how she had 
passed the morning, and fully persuaded that she would leave the Delviles with 
a determination never more, but by necessity, to see them: she was, therefore, 
not only surprised but disappointed, when instead of fulfilling her 
expectations, she assured her that she had been delighted with Mrs Delvile, 
whose engaging qualities amply recompensed her for the arrogance of her 
husband; that her visit had no fault but that of being too short, and that she 
had already appointed an early day for repeating it.
Mrs Harrel was evidently hurt by this praise, and Cecilia, who perceived among 
all her guardians a powerful disposition to hatred and jealousy, soon dropt the 
subject: though so much had she been charmed with Mrs Delvile, that a scheme of 
removal once more occurred to her, notwithstanding her dislike of her stately 
guardian.
At dinner, as usual, they were joined by Sir Robert Floyer, who grew more and 
more assiduous in his attendance, but who, this day, contrary to his general 
custom of remaining with the gentlemen, made his exit before the ladies left 
the table; and as soon as he was gone, Mr Harrel desired a private conference 
with Cecilia.
They went together to the drawing-room, where, after a flourishing preface upon 
the merits of Sir Robert Floyer, he formally acquainted her that he was 
commissioned by that gentleman, to make her a tender of his hand and fortune.
Cecilia, who had not much reason to be surprised at this overture, desired him 
to tell the Baronet, she was obliged to him for the honour he intended her, at 
the same time that she absolutely declined receiving it.
Mr Harrel, laughing, told her this answer was very well for a beginning, though 
it would by no means serve beyond the first day of the declaration; but when 
Cecilia assured him she should firmly adhere to it, he remonstrated with equal 
surprise and discontent upon the reasons of her refusal. She thought it 
sufficient to tell him that Sir Robert did not please her, but, with much 
raillery, he denied the assertion credit, assuring her that he was universally 
admired by the ladies, that she could not possibly receive a more honourable 
offer, and that he was reckoned by every body the finest gentleman about the 
town. His fortune, he added, was equally unexceptionable with his figure and 
his rank in life; all the world, he was certain, would approve the connexion, 
and the settlement made upon her should be dictated by herself.
Cecilia begged him to be satisfied with an answer which she never could change, 
and to spare her the enumeration of particular objections, since Sir Robert was 
wholly and in every respect disagreeable to her.
"What, then," cried he, "could make you so frightened for him at the 
Opera-house? There has been but one opinion about town ever since of your 
prepossession in his favour."
"I am extremely concerned to hear it; my fright was but the effect of surprise, 
and belonged not more to Sir Robert than to Mr Belfield."
He told her that nobody else thought the same, that her marriage with the 
Baronet was universally expected, and, in conclusion, notwithstanding her 
earnest desire that he would instantly and explicitly inform Sir Robert of her 
determination, he repeatedly refused to give him any final answer till she had 
taken more time for consideration.
Cecilia was extremely displeased at this irksome importunity, and still more 
chagrined to find her incautious emotion at the Opera-house, had given rise to 
suspicions of her harbouring a partiality for a man whom every day she more 
heartily disliked.
While she was deliberating in what manner she could clear up this mistake, 
which, after she was left alone, occupied all her thoughts, she was interrupted 
by the entrance of Mr. Monckton, whose joy in meeting her at length by herself 
exceeded not her own, for charmed as he was that he could now examine into the 
state of her affairs, she was not less delighted that she could make them known 
to him.
After mutual expressions, guarded, however, on the part of Mr. Monckton, though 
unreserved on that of Cecilia, of their satisfaction in being again able to 
converse as in former times, he asked if she would permit him, as the privilege 
of their long acquaintance, to speak to her with sincerity.
She assured him he could not more oblige her.
"Let me, then," said he, "enquire if yet that ardent confidence in your own 
steadiness, which so much disdained my fears that the change of your residence 
might produce a change in your sentiments, is still as unshaken as when we 
parted in Suffolk? Or whether experience, that foe to unpractised refinement, 
has already taught you the fallibility of theory?"
"When I assure you," replied Cecilia, "that your enquiry gives me no pain, I 
think I have sufficiently answered it, for were I conscious of any alteration, 
it could not but embarrass and distress me. Very far, however, from finding 
myself in the danger with which you threatened me, of forgetting Bury, its 
inhabitants and its environs, I think with pleasure of little else, since 
London, instead of bewitching, has greatly disappointed me."
"How so?" cried Mr Monckton, much delighted.
"Not," answered she, "in itself, not in its magnificence, nor in its 
diversions, which seem to be inexhaustible; but these, though copious as 
instruments of pleasure, are very shallow as sources of happiness: the 
disappointment, therefore, comes nearer home, and springs not from London, but 
from my own situation."
"Is that, then, disagreeable to you?"
"You shall yourself judge, when I have told you that from the time of my 
quitting your house till this very moment, when I have again the happiness of 
talking with you, I have never once had any conversation, society or 
intercourse, in which friendship or affection have had any share, or my mind 
has had the least interest."
She then entered into a detail of her way of life, told him how little suited 
to her taste was the unbounded dissipation of the Harrels, and feelingly 
expatiated upon the disappointment she had received from the alteration in the 
manners and conduct of her young friend. "In her," she continued, "had I found 
the companion I came prepared to meet, the companion from whom I had so lately 
parted, and in whose society I expected to find consolation for the loss of 
yours and of Mrs Charlton's, I should have complained of nothing; the very 
places that now tire, might then have entertained me, and all that now passes 
for unmeaning dissipation, might then have worn the appearance of variety and 
pleasure. But where the mind is wholly without interest, every thing is languid 
and insipid; and accustomed as I have long been to think friendship the first 
of human blessings, and social converse the greatest of human enjoyments, how 
ever can I reconcile myself to a state of careless indifference, to making 
acquaintance without any concern either for preserving or esteeming them, and 
to going on from day to day in an eager search of amusement, with no companion 
for the hours of retirement, and no view beyond that of passing the present 
moment in apparent gaiety and thoughtlessness?"
Mr Monckton, who heard these complaints with secret rapture, far from seeking 
to soften or remove, used his utmost endeavours to strengthen and encrease 
them, by artfully retracing her former way of life, and pointing out with added 
censures the change in it she had been lately compelled to make: "a change," he 
continued, "which though ruinous of your time, and detrimental to your 
happiness, use will, I fear, familiarize, and familiarity render pleasant."
"These suspicions, sir," said Cecilia, "mortify me greatly; and why, when far 
from finding me pleased, you hear nothing but repining, should you still 
continue to harbour them?"
"Because your trial has yet been too short to prove your firmness, and because 
there is nothing to which time cannot contentedly accustom us."
"I feel not much fear," said Cecilia, "of standing such a test as might fully 
satisfy you; but nevertheless, not to be too presumptuous, I have by no means 
exposed myself to all the dangers which you think surround me, for of late I 
have spent almost every evening at home and by myself."
This intelligence was to Mr Monckton a surprise the most agreeable he could 
receive. Her distaste for the amusements which were offered her greatly 
relieved his fears of her forming any alarming connection, and the discovery 
that while so anxiously he had sought her every where in public, she had 
quietly passed her time by her own fireside, not only re-assured him for the 
present, but gave him information where he might meet with her in future.
He then talked of the duel, and solicitously led her to speak {openly} of Sir 
Robert Floyer; and here too, his satisfaction was entire; he found her dislike 
of him such as his knowledge of her disposition made him expect, and she wholly 
removed his suspicions concerning her anxiety about the quarrel, by explaining 
to him her apprehensions of having occasioned it herself, from accepting the 
civility of Mr Belfield, at the very moment she shewed her aversion to 
receiving that of Sir Robert.
Neither did her confidence rest here; she acquainted him with the conversation 
she had just had with Mr Harrel, and begged his advice in what manner she might 
secure herself from further importunity.
Mr Monckton had now a new subject for his discernment. Every thing had 
confirmed to him the passion which Mr Arnott had conceived for Cecilia, and he 
had therefore concluded the interest of the Harrels would be all in his favour: 
other ideas now struck him; he found that Mr Arnott was given up for Sir 
Robert, and he determined carefully to watch the motions both of the Baronet 
and her young guardian, in order to discover the nature of their plans and 
connection. Mean time, convinced by her unaffected aversion to the proposals 
she had received, that she was at present in no danger from the league he 
suspected, he merely advised her to persevere in manifesting a calm repugnance 
to their solicitations, which could not fail, before long, to dishearten them 
both.
"But Sir," cried Cecilia, "I now fear this man as much as I dislike him, for 
his late fierceness and brutality, though they have encreased my disgust, make 
me dread to shew it. I am impatient, therefore, to have done with him, and to 
see him no more. And for this purpose, I wish to quit the house of Mr Harrel, 
where he has access at his pleasure."
"You can wish nothing more judiciously," cried he; "would you, then, return 
into the country?"
"That is not yet in my power; I am obliged to reside with one of my guardians. 
To-day I have seen Mrs Delvile, and—"
"Mrs Delvile?" interrupted Mr Monckton, in a voice of astonishment. "Surely you 
do not think of removing into that family?"
"What can I do so well? Mrs Delvile is a charming woman, and her conversation 
would afford me more entertainment and instruction in a single day, than under 
this roof I should obtain in a twelvemonth."
"Are you serious? Do you really think of making such a change?"
"I really wish it, but I know not yet if it is practicable: on Thursday, 
however, I am to dine with her, and then, if it is in my power, I will hint to 
her my desire."
"And can Miss Beverley possibly wish," cried Mr Monckton with earnestness, "to 
reside in such a house? Is not Mr Delvile the most ostentatious, haughty, and 
self-sufficient of men? Is not his wife the proudest of women? And is not the 
whole family odious to all the world?"
"You amaze me!" cried Cecilia; "surely that cannot be their general character? 
Mr Delvile, indeed, deserves all the censure he can meet for his wearisome 
parade of superiority; but his lady by no means merits to be included in the 
same reproach. I have spent this whole morning with her, and though I waited 
upon her with a strong prejudice in her disfavour, I observed in her no pride 
that exceeded the bounds of propriety and native dignity."
"Have you often been at the house? Do you know the son, too?"
"I have seen him three or four times."
"And what do you think of him?"
"I hardly know enough of him to judge fairly."
"But what does he seem to you? Do you not perceive in him already all the 
arrogance, all the contemptuous insolence of his father?"
"O no! far from it indeed; his mind seems to be liberal and noble, open to 
impressions of merit, and eager to honour and promote it."
"You are much deceived; you have been reading your own mind, and thought you 
had read his: I would advise you sedulously to avoid the whole family; you will 
find all intercourse with them irksome and comfortless: such as the father 
appears at once, the wife and the son will, in a few more meetings, appear 
also. They are descended from the same stock, and inherit the same 
self-complacency. Mr Delvile married his cousin, and each of them instigates 
the other to believe that all birth and rank would be at an end in the world, 
if their own superb family had not a promise of support from their hopeful 
Mortimer. Should you precipitately settle yourself in their house, you would 
very soon be totally weighed down by their united insolence."
Cecilia again and warmly attempted to defend them; but Mr Monckton was so 
positive in his assertions, and so significant in his insinuations to their 
discredit, that she was at length persuaded she had judged too hastily, and, 
after thanking him for his counsel, promised not to take any measures towards a 
removal without his advice.
This was all he desired; and now, enlivened by finding that his influence with 
her was unimpaired, and that her heart was yet her own, he ceased his 
exhortations, and turned the discourse to subjects more gay and general, 
judiciously cautious neither by tedious admonitions to disgust, nor by fretful 
solicitude to alarm her. He did not quit her till the evening was far advanced, 
and then, in returning to his own house, felt all his anxieties and 
disappointments recompensed by the comfort this long and satisfactory 
conversation had afforded him. While Cecilia, charmed with having spent the 
morning with her new acquaintance, and the evening with her old friend, retired 
to rest better pleased with the disposal of her time than she had yet been 
since her journey from Suffolk.





