
The two following days had neither event nor disturbance, except some little 
vexation occasioned by the behaviour of Sir Robert Floyer, who still appeared 
not to entertain any doubt of the success of his addresses. This impertinent 
confidence she could only attribute to the officious encouragement of Mr 
Harrel, and therefore she determined rather to seek than to avoid an 
explanation with him. But she had, in the mean time, the satisfaction of 
hearing from Mr Arnott, who, ever eager to oblige her, was frequent in his 
enquiries, that Mr Belfield was almost entirely recovered.
On Thursday, according to her appointment, she again went to St James' Square, 
and being shewn into the drawing-room till dinner was ready, found there only 
young Mr Delvile.
After some general conversation, he asked her how lately she had had any news 
of Mr Belfield?
"This morning," she answered, "when I had the pleasure of hearing he was quite 
recovered. Have you seen him again, sir?"
"Yes madam, twice."
"And did you think him almost well?"
"I thought," answered he, with some hesitation, "and I think still, that your 
enquiries ought to be his cure."
"O," cried Cecilia, "I hope he has far better medicines: but I am afraid I have 
been misinformed, for I see you do not think him better."
"You must not, however," replied he, "blame those messengers whose artifice has 
only had your satisfaction in view; nor should I be so malignant as to blast 
their designs, if I did not fear that Mr Belfield's actual safety may be 
endangered by your continual deception."
"What deception, sir? I don't at all understand you. How is his safety 
endangered?"
"Ah madam!" said he smiling, "what danger indeed is there that any man would 
not risk to give birth to such solicitude! Mr Belfield however, I believe is in 
none from which a command of yours cannot rescue him."
"Then were I an hard-hearted damsel indeed not to issue it! but if my commands 
are so medicinal, pray instruct me how to administer them."
"You must order him to give up, for the present, his plan of going into the 
country, where he can have no assistance, and where his wound must be dressed 
only by a common servant, and to remain quietly in town till his surgeon 
pronounces that he may travel without any hazard."
"But is he, seriously, so mad as to intend leaving town without the consent of 
his surgeon?"
"Nothing less than such an intention could have induced me to undeceive you 
with respect to his recovery. But indeed I am no friend to those artifices 
which purchase present relief by future misery: I venture, therefore, to speak 
to you the simple truth, that by a timely exertion of your influence you may 
prevent further evil."
"I know not, Sir," said Cecilia, with the utmost surprise, "why you should 
suppose I have any such influence; nor can I imagine that any deception has 
been practiced."
"It is possible," answered he, "I may have been too much alarmed; but in such a 
case as this, no information ought to be depended upon but that of his surgeon. 
You, madam, may probably know his opinion?"
"Me?—No, indeed? I never saw his surgeon; I know not even who he is."
"I purpose calling upon him to-morrow morning; will Miss Beverley permit me 
afterwards the honour of communicating to her what may pass?"
"I thank you, sir," said she, colouring very high; "but my impatience is by no 
means so great as to occasion my giving you that trouble."
Delvile, perceiving her change of countenance, instantly, and with much 
respect, entreated her pardon for the proposal; which, however, she had no 
sooner granted, than he said very archly, "Why indeed you have not much right 
to be angry, since it was your own frankness that excited mine. And thus, you 
find, like most other culprits, I am ready to cast the blame of the offence 
upon the offended. I feel, however, an irresistible propensity to do service to 
Mr Belfield;—shall I sin quite beyond forgiveness if I venture to tell you 
how I found him situated this morning?"
"No, certainly,—if you wish it, I can have no objection."
"I found him, then, surrounded by a set of gay young men, who, by way of 
keeping up his spirits, made him laugh and talk without ceasing: he assured me 
himself that he was perfectly well, and intended to gallop out of town 
to-morrow morning; though, when I shook hands with him at parting, I was both 
shocked and alarmed to feel by the burning heat of the skin, that far from 
discarding his surgeon, he ought rather to call in a physician."
"I am very much concerned to hear this account," said Cecilia; "but I do not 
well understand what you mean should on my part follow it?"
"That," answered he, bowing, with a look of mock gravity, "I pretend not to 
settle! In stating the case I have satisfied my conscience, and if in hearing 
it you can pardon the liberty I have taken, I shall as much honour the openness 
of your character, as I admire that of your countenance."
Cecilia now, to her no little astonishment, found she had the same mistake to 
clear up at present concerning Mr Belfield, that only three days before she had 
explained with respect to the Baronet. But she had no time to speak further 
upon the subject, as the entrance of Mrs Delvile put an end to their discourse.
That lady received her with the most distinguishing kindness; apologised for 
not sooner waiting upon her, and repeatedly declared that nothing but 
indisposition should have prevented her returning the favour of her first visit.
They were soon after summoned to dinner. Mr Delvile, to the infinite joy of 
Cecilia, was out.
The day was spent greatly to her satisfaction. There was no interruption from 
visitors, she was tormented by the discussion of no disagreeable subjects, the 
duel was not mentioned, the antagonists were not hinted at, she was teized with 
no self-sufficient encouragement, and wearied with no mortifying affability; 
the conversation at once was lively and rational, and though general, was 
rendered interesting, by a reciprocation of good-will and pleasure in the 
conversers.
The favourable opinion she had conceived both of the mother and the son this 
long visit served to confirm: in Mrs Delvile she found strong sense, quick 
parts, and high breeding; in Mortimer, sincerity and vivacity joined with 
softness and elegance; and in both there seemed the most liberal admiration of 
talents, with an openness of heart that disdained all disguise. Greatly pleased 
with their manners, and struck with all that was apparent in their characters, 
she much regretted the prejudice of Mr Monckton, which now, with the promise 
she had given him, was all that opposed her making an immediate effort towards 
a change in her abode.
She did not take her leave till eleven o'clock, when Mrs Delvile, after 
repeatedly thanking her for her visit, said she would not so much encroach upon 
her good nature as to request another till she had waited upon her in return; 
but added, that she meant very speedily to pay that debt, in order to enable 
herself, by friendly and frequent meetings, to enter upon the confidential 
commission with which her guardian had entrusted her.
Cecilia was pleased with the delicacy which gave rise to this forbearance, yet 
having in fact nothing either to relate or conceal, she was rather sorry than 
glad at the delay of an explanation, since she found the whole family was in an 
error with respect to the situation of her affairs.






BOOK III.






