
Never had the heart of Cecilia felt so light, so gay, so glowing as after the 
transaction of this affair: her life had never appeared to her so important, 
nor her wealth so valuable. To see five helpless children provided for by 
herself, rescued from the extremes of penury and wretchedness, and put in a way 
to become useful to society, and comfortable to themselves; to behold their 
feeble mother, snatched from the hardship of that labour which, over-powering 
her strength, had almost destroyed her existence, now placed in a situation 
where a competent maintenance might be earned without fatigue, and the remnant 
of her days pass in easy employment—to view such sights, and have power to 
say "These deeds are mine!" what, to a disposition fraught with tenderness and 
benevolence, could give purer self-applause, or more exquisite satisfaction?
Such were the pleasures which regaled the reflections of Cecilia when, in her 
way home, having got out of her chair to walk through the upper part of Oxford 
Street, she was suddenly met by the old gentleman whose emphatical addresses to 
her had so much excited her astonishment.
He was passing quick on, but stopping the moment he perceived her, he sternly 
called out "Are you proud? are you callous? are you hard of heart so soon?"
"Put me, if you please, to some trial!" cried Cecilia, with the virtuous 
courage of a self-acquitting conscience.
"I already have!" returned he, indignantly, "and already I have found you 
faulty!"
"I am sorry to hear it," said the amazed Cecilia, "but at least I hope you will 
tell me in what?"
"You refused me admittance," he answered, "yet I was your friend, yet I was 
willing to prolong the term of your genuine {tranquillity}! I pointed out to 
you a method of preserving peace with your own soul; I came to you in behalf of 
the poor, and instructed you how to merit their prayers; you heard me, you were 
susceptible, you complied! I meant to have repeated the lesson, to have tuned 
your whole heart to compassion, and to have taught you the sad duties of 
sympathising humanity. For this purpose I called again, but again I was not 
admitted! Short was the period of my absence, yet long enough for the 
completion of your downfall!"
"Good heaven," cried Cecilia, "how dreadful is this language! when have you 
called, Sir? I never heard you had been at the house. Far from refusing you 
admittance, I wished to see you."
"Indeed?" cried he, with some softness, "and are you, in truth, not proud? not 
callous? not hard of heart? Follow me, then, and visit the humble and the poor, 
follow me, and give comfort to the fallen and dejected!"
At this invitation, however desirous to do good, Cecilia started; the 
strangeness of the inviter, his flightiness, his authoritative manner, and the 
uncertainty whither or to whom he might carry her, made her fearful of 
proceeding: yet a benevolent curiosity to see as well as serve the objects of 
his recommendation, joined to the eagerness of youthful integrity to clear her 
own character from the aspersion of hard-heartedness, soon conquered her 
irresolution, and making a sign to her servant to keep near her, she followed 
as her conductor led.
He went on silently and solemnly till he came to Swallow-street, then turning 
into it, he stopt at a small and mean-looking house, knocked at the door, and 
without asking any question of the man who opened it, beckoned her to come 
after him, and hastened up some narrow winding stairs.
Cecilia again hesitated; but when she recollected that this old man, though 
little known, was frequently seen, and though with few people acquainted, was 
by many personally recognized, she thought it impossible he could mean her any 
injury. She ordered her servant, however, to come in, and bid him keep walking 
up and down the stairs till she returned to him. And then she obeyed the 
directions of her guide.
He proceeded till he came to the second floor, then, again beckoning her to 
follow him, he opened a door, and entered a small and very meanly furnished 
apartment.
And here, to her infinite astonishment, she perceived, employed in washing some 
china, a very lovely young woman, {genteelly} dressed, and appearing hardly 
seventeen years of age.
The moment they came in, with evident marks of confusion, she instantly gave 
over her work, hastily putting the basin she was washing upon the table, and 
endeavouring to hide the towel with which she was wiping it behind her chair.
The old gentleman, advancing to her with quickness, said, "How is he now? Is he 
better? will he live?"
"Heaven forbid he should not!" answered the young woman with emotion, "but, 
indeed, he is no better!"
"Look here," said he, pointing to Cecilia, "I have brought you one who has 
power to serve you, and to relieve your distress: one who is rolling in 
affluence, a stranger to ill, a novice in the world; unskilled in the miseries 
she is yet to endure, unconscious of the depravity into which she is to sink! 
receive her benefactions while yet she is untainted, satisfied that while, she 
aids you, she is blessing herself!"
The young woman, blushing and abashed, said, "You are very good to me, Sir, but 
there is no occasion—there is no need—I have not any necessity—I am far 
from being so very much in want—"
"Poor, simple soul!" interrupted the old man, "and art thou ashamed of poverty? 
Guard, guard thyself from other shames, and the wealthiest may envy thee! Tell 
her thy story, plainly, roundly, truly; abate nothing of thy indigence, repress 
nothing of her liberality. The Poor not impoverished by their own Guilt, are 
Equals of the Affluent, not enriched by their own Virtue. Come, then, and let 
me present ye to each other! young as ye both are, with many years and many 
sorrows to encounter, lighten the burthen of each other's cares, by the 
heart-soothing exchange of gratitude for beneficence!"
He then took a hand of each, and joining them between his own, "You," he 
continued, "who, though rich, are not hardened, and you, who though poor, are 
not debased, why should ye not love, why should ye not cherish each other? The 
afflictions of life are tedious, its joys are evanescent; ye are now both 
young, and, with little to enjoy, will find much to suffer. Ye are both, too, I 
believe, innocent—Oh could ye always remain so!—Cherubs were ye then, and 
the sons of men might worship you!"
He stopt, checked by his own rising emotion; but soon resuming his usual 
austerity, "Such, however," he continued, "is not the condition of humanity; in 
pity, therefore, to the evils impending over both, be kind to each other! I 
leave you together, and to your mutual tenderness I recommend you!"
Then, turning particularly to Cecilia, "Disdain not," he said, "to console the 
depressed; look upon her without scorn, converse with her without contempt: 
like you, she is an orphan, though not like you, an heiress;—like her, you 
are fatherless, though not like her friendless! If she is awaited by the 
temptations of adversity, you, also, are surrounded by the corruptions of 
prosperity. Your fall is most probable, her's most excusable;—commiserate her 
therefore now,—by and by she may commiserate you?"
And with these words he left the room.
A total silence for some time succeeded his departure: Cecilia found it 
difficult to recover from the surprise into which she had been thrown 
sufficiently for speech: in following her extraordinary director, her 
imagination had painted to her a scene such as she had so lately quitted, and 
prepared her to behold some family in distress, some helpless creature in 
sickness, or some children in want; but of these to see none, to meet but one 
person, and that one fair, young, and delicate,—an introduction so singular 
to an object so unthought of, deprived her of all power but that of shewing her 
amazement.
Mean while the young woman looked scarcely less surprised, and infinitely more 
embarrassed. She surveyed her apartment with vexation, and her guest with 
confusion; she had listened to the exhortation of the old man with visible 
uneasiness, and now he was gone, seemed overwhelmed with shame and chagrin.
Cecilia, who in observing these emotions felt both her curiosity and her 
compassion encrease, pressed her hand as she parted with it, and, when a little 
recovered, said, "You must think this a strange intrusion; but the gentleman 
who brought me hither is perhaps so well known to you, as to make his 
singularities plead with you their own apology."
"No indeed, madam," she answered, bashfully, "he is very little known to me; 
but he is very good, and very desirous to do me service:—not but what I 
believe he thinks me much worse off than I really am, for, I assure you, madam, 
whatever he has said, I am not ill off at all—hardly."
The various doubts to her disadvantage, which had at first, from her uncommon 
situation, arisen in the mind of Cecilia, this anxiety to disguise, not display 
her distress, considerably removed, since it cleared her of all suspicion of 
seeking by artifice and imposition to play upon her feelings.
With a gentleness, therefore, the most soothing, she replied, "I should by no 
means have broken in upon you thus unexpectedly, if I had not concluded my 
conductor had some right to bring me. However, since we are actually met, let 
us remember his injunctions, and endeavour not to part till, by a mutual 
exchange of good-will, each has added a friend to the other."
"You are condescending, indeed, madam," answered the young woman, with an air 
the most humble, "looking as you look, to talk of a friend when you come to 
such a place as this! up two pair of stairs! no furniture! no servant! every 
thing in such disorder!—indeed I wonder at Mr. Albany! he should not—but he 
thinks every body's affairs may be made public, and does not care what he 
tells, nor who hears him;—he knows not the pain he gives, nor the mischief he 
may do."
"I am very much concerned," cried Cecilia, more and more surprised at all she 
heard, "to find I have been thus instrumental to distressing you. I was 
ignorant whither I was coming, and followed him, believe me, neither from 
curiosity nor inclination, but simply because I knew not how to refuse him. He 
is gone, however, and I will therefore relieve you by going too: but permit me 
to leave behind me a small testimony that the intention of my coming was not 
mere impertinence."
She then took out her purse; but the young woman, starting back with a look of 
resentful mortification, exclaimed, "No, madam! you are quite mistaken; pray 
put up your purse; I am no beggar! Mr Albany has misrepresented me, if he has 
told you I am."
Cecilia, mortified in her turn at this unexpected rejection of an offer she had 
thought herself invited to make, stood some moments silent; and then said, "I 
am far from meaning to offend you, and I sincerely beg your pardon if I have 
misunderstood the charge just now given to me."
"I have nothing to pardon, madam," said she, more calmly, "except, indeed, to 
Mr Albany; and to him, 'tis of no use to be angry, for he minds not what I say! 
he is very good, but he is very strange, for he thinks the whole world made to 
live in common, and that every one who is poor should ask, and every one who is 
rich should give: he does not know that there are many who would rather starve."
"And are you," said Cecilia, half-smiling, "of that number?"
"No, indeed, madam! I have not so much greatness of mind. But those to whom I 
belong have more fortitude and higher spirit. I wish I could imitate them!"
Struck with the candour and simplicity of this speech, Cecilia now felt a warm 
desire to serve her, and taking her hand, said, "Forgive me, but though I see 
you wish me gone, I know not how to leave you: recollect, therefore, the charge 
that has been given to us both, and if you refuse my assistance one way, point 
out to me in what other I may offer it."
"You are very kind, madam," she answered, "and I dare say you are very good; I 
am sure you look so, at least. But I want nothing; I do very well, and I have 
hopes of doing better. Mr Albany is too impatient. He knows, indeed, that I am 
not extremely rich, but he is much to blame if he supposes me therefore an 
object of charity, and thinks me so mean as to receive money from a stranger."
"I am truly sorry," cried Cecilia, "for the error I have committed, but you 
must suffer me to make my peace with you before we part: yet, till I am better 
known to you, I am fearful of proposing terms. Perhaps you will permit me to 
leave you my direction, and do me the favour to call upon me yourself?"
"O no, madam! I have a sick relation whom I cannot leave: and indeed, if he 
were well, he would not like to have me make an acquaintance while I am in this 
place."
"I hope you are not his only nurse? I am sure you do not look able to bear such 
fatigue. Has he a physician? Is he properly attended?"
"No, madam; he has no physician, and no attendance at all!"
"And is it possible that in such a situation you can refuse to be assisted? 
Surely you should accept some help for him, if not for yourself."
"But what will that signify when, if I do, he will not make use of it? and when 
he had a thousand and a thousand times rather die, than let any one know he is 
in want?"
"Take it, then, unknown to him; serve him without acquainting him you serve 
him. Surely you would not suffer him to perish without aid?"
"Heaven forbid! But what can I do? I am under his command, madam, not he under 
mine!"
"Is he your father?—Pardon my question, but your youth seems much to want 
such a protector."
"No, madam, I have no father! I was happier when I had! He is my brother."
"And what is his illness?"
"A fever."
"A fever, and without a physician! Are you sure, too, it is not infectious?"
"O yes, too sure!"
"Too sure? how so?"
"Because I know too well the occasion of it!"
"And what is the occasion?" cried Cecilia, again taking her hand, "pray trust 
me; indeed you shall not repent your confidence. Your reserve hitherto has only 
raised you in my esteem, but do not carry it so far as to mortify me by a total 
rejection of my good offices."
"Ah madam!" said the young woman, sighing, "you ought to be good, I am sure, 
for you will draw all out of me by such kindness as this! the occasion was a 
neglected wound, never properly healed."
"A wound? is he in the army?"
"No,—he was shot through the side in a duel."
"In a duel?" exclaimed Cecilia, "pray what is his name?"
"O that I must not tell you! his name is a great secret now, while he is in 
this poor place, for I know he had almost rather never see the light again than 
have it known."
"Surely, surely," cried Cecilia, with much emotion, "he cannot—I hope he 
cannot be Mr Belfield?"
"Ah Heaven!" cried the young woman, screaming, "do you then know him?"
Here, in mutual astonishment, they looked at each other.
"You are then," said Cecilia, "the sister of Mr Belfield? And Mr Belfield is 
thus sick, his wound is not yet healed,—and he is without any help!"
"And who, madam, are you?" cried she, "and how is it you know him?"
"My name is Beverley."
"Ah!" exclaimed she again, "I fear I have done nothing but mischief! I know 
very well who you are now, madam, but if my brother discovers that I have 
betrayed him, he will take it very unkind, and perhaps never forgive me."
"Be not alarmed," cried Cecilia; "rest assured he shall never know it. Is he 
not now in the country?"
"No, madam, he is now in the very next room."
"But what is become of the surgeon who used to attend him, and why does he not 
still visit him?"
"It is in vain, now, to hide any thing from you; my brother deceived him, and 
said he was going out of town merely to get rid of him."
"And what could induce him to act so strangely?"
"A reason which you, madam, I hope, will never know, Poverty!—he would not 
run up a bill he could not pay."
"Good Heaven!—But what can be done for him? He must not be suffered to linger 
thus; we must contrive some method of relieving and assisting him, whether he 
will consent or not."
"I fear that will not be possible. One of his friends has already found him 
out, and has written him the kindest letter! but he would not answer it, and 
would not see him, and was only fretted and angry."
"Well," said Cecilia, "I will not keep you longer, lest he should be alarmed by 
your absence. To-morrow morning, with your leave, I will call upon you again, 
and then, I hope, you will permit me to make some effort to assist you."
"If it only depended upon me, madam," she answered, "now I have the honour to 
know who you are, I believe I should not make much scruple, for I was not 
brought up to notions so high as my brother. Ah! happy had it been for him, for 
me, for all his family, if he had not had them neither!"
Cecilia then repeated her expressions of comfort and kindness, and took her 
leave.
This little adventure gave her infinite concern; all the horror which the duel 
had originally occasioned her, again returned; she accused herself with much 
bitterness for having brought it on; and finding that Mr Belfield was so 
cruelly a sufferer both in his health and his affairs, she thought it incumbent 
upon her to relieve him to the utmost of her ability.
His sister, too, had extremely interested her; her youth, and the uncommon 
artlessness of her conversation, added to her melancholy situation, and the 
loveliness of her person, excited in her a desire to serve, and an inclination 
to love her; and she determined, if she found her as deserving as she seemed 
engaging, not only to assist her at present, but, if her distresses continued, 
to received her into her own house in future.
Again she regretted the undue detention of her L200. What she now had to spare 
was extremely inadequate to what she now wished to bestow, and she looked 
forward to the conclusion of her minority with encreasing eagerness. The 
generous and elegant plan of life she then intended to pursue, daily gained 
ground in her imagination, and credit in her opinion.





