
The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, Cecilia went in a chair to 
Swallow-street; she enquired for Miss Belfield, and was told to go up stairs: 
but what was her amazement to meet, just coming out of the room into which she 
was entering, young Delvile!
They both started, and Cecilia, from the seeming strangeness of her situation, 
felt a confusion with which she had hitherto been unacquainted. But Delvile, 
presently recovering from his surprise, said to her, with an expressive smile, 
"How good is Miss Beverley thus to visit the sick! and how much better might I 
have had the pleasure of seeing Mr Belfield, had I but, by prescience, known 
her design, and deferred my own enquiries till he had been revived by hers!"
And then, bowing and wishing her good morning, he glided past her.
Cecilia, notwithstanding the openness and purity of her intentions, was so much 
disconcerted by this unexpected meeting, and pointed speech, that she had not 
the presence of mind to call him back and clear herself: and the various 
interrogatories and railleries which had already passed between them upon the 
subject of Mr Belfield, made her suppose that what he had formerly suspected he 
would now think confirmed, and conclude that all her assertions of 
indifference, proceeded merely from that readiness at hypocrisy upon particular 
subjects, of which he had openly accused her whole Sex.
This circumstance and this apprehension took from her for a while all interest 
in the errand upon which she came; but the benevolence of her heart soon 
brought it back, when, upon going into the room, she saw her new favourite in 
tears.
"What is the matter?" cried she, tenderly; "no new affliction I hope has 
happened? Your brother is not worse?"
"No, madam, he is much the same; I was not then crying for him."
"For what then? tell me, acquaint me with your sorrows, and assure yourself you 
tell them to a friend."
"I was crying, madam, to find so much goodness in the world, when I thought 
there was so little! to find I have some chance of being again happy, when I 
thought I was miserable for ever! Two whole years have I spent in nothing but 
unhappiness, and I thought there was nothing else to be had; but yesterday, 
madam, brought me you, with every promise of nobleness and protection; and 
to-day, a friend of my brother's has behaved so generously, that even my 
brother has listened to him, and almost consented to be obliged to him!"
"And have you already known so much sorrow," said Cecilia, "that this little 
dawn of prosperity should wholly overpower your spirits? Gentle, amiable girl! 
may the future recompense you for the past, and may Mr Albany's kind wishes be 
fulfilled in the reciprocation of our comfort and affection!"
They then entered into a conversation which the sweetness of Cecilia, and the 
gratitude of Miss Belfield, soon rendered interesting, friendly and unreserved: 
and in a very short time, whatever was essential in the story or situation of 
the latter was fully communicated. She gave, however, a charge the most 
earnest, that her brother should never be acquainted with the confidence she 
had made.
Her father, who had been dead only two years, was a linen-draper in the city; 
he had six daughters, of whom herself was the youngest, and only one son. This 
son, Mr Belfield, was alike the darling of his father, mother, and sisters: he 
was brought up at Eaton, no expence was spared in his education, nothing was 
denied that could make him happy. With an excellent understanding he had 
uncommon quickness of parts, and his progress in his studies was rapid and 
honourable: his father, though he always meant him for his successor in his 
business, heard of his improvement with rapture, often saying, "My boy will be 
the ornament of the city, he will be the best scholar in any shop in London."
He was soon, however, taught another lesson; when, at the age of sixteen, he 
returned home, and was placed in the shop, instead of applying his talents, as 
his father had expected, to trade, he both despised and abhorred the name of 
it; when serious, treating it with contempt, when gay, with derision.
He was seized, also, with a most ardent desire to finish his education, like 
those of his school-fellows who left Eaton at the same time, at one of the 
Universities; and, after many difficulties, this petition, at the intercession 
of his mother, was granted, old Mr Belfield telling him he hoped a little more 
learning would give him a little more sense, and that when he became a finished 
student, he would not only know the true value of business, but understand how 
to get money, and make a bargain, better than any man whatsoever within Temple 
Bar.
These expectations, equally shortsighted, were also equally fallacious with the 
former: the son again returned, and returned, as his father had hoped, a 
finished student; but, far from being more tractable, or better disposed for 
application to trade, his aversion to it now was more stubborn, and his 
opposition more hardy than ever. The young men of fashion with whom he had 
formed friendships at school, or at the University, and with whom, from the 
indulgence of his father, he was always able to vie in expence, and from the 
indulgence of Nature to excel in capacity, earnestly sought the continuance of 
his acquaintance, and courted and coveted the pleasure of his conversation: but 
though he was now totally disqualified for any other society, he lost all 
delight in their favour from the fear they should discover his abode, and 
sedulously endeavoured to avoid even occasionally meeting them, lest any of his 
family should at the same time approach him: for of his family, though wealthy, 
worthy, and independent, he was now so utterly ashamed, that the mortification 
the most cruel he could receive, was to be asked his address, or told he should 
be visited.
Tired, at length, of evading the enquiries made by some, and forcing faint 
laughs at the detection made by others, he privately took a lodging at the west 
end of the town, to which he thence forward directed all his friends, and 
where, under various pretences, he contrived to spend the greatest part of his 
time.
In all his expensive deceits and frolics, his mother was his never-failing 
confidant and assistant; for when she heard that the companions of her son were 
men of fashion, some born to titles, others destined to high stations, she 
concluded he was in the certain road to honour and profit, and frequently 
distressed herself, without ever repining, in order to enable him to preserve 
upon equal terms, connections which she believed so conducive to his future 
grandeur.
In this wild and unsettled manner he passed some time, struggling incessantly 
against the authority of his father, privately abetted by his mother, and 
constantly aided and admired by his sisters: till, sick of so desultory a way 
of life, he entered himself a volunteer in the army.
How soon he grew tired of this change has already been related, {Footnote: Book 
1, Chap. II.} as well as his reconciliation with his father, and his becoming a 
student at the Temple: for the father now grew as weary of opposing, as the 
young man of being opposed.
Here, for two or three years, he lived in happiness uninterrupted; he extended 
his acquaintance among the great, by whom he was no sooner known than caressed 
and admired, and he frequently visited his family, which, though he blushed to 
own in public, he affectionately loved in private. His profession, indeed, was 
but little in his thoughts, successive engagements occupying almost all his 
hours. Delighted with the favour of the world, and charmed to find his presence 
seemed the signal for entertainment, he soon forgot the uncertainty of his 
fortune, and the inferiority of his rank: the law grew more and more fatiguing, 
pleasure became more and more alluring, and, by degrees, he had not a day 
unappropriated to some party or amusement; voluntarily consigning the few 
leisure moments his gay circle afforded him, to the indulgence of his fancy in 
some hasty compositions in verse, which were handed about in manuscript, and 
which contributed to keep him in fashion.
Such was his situation at the death of his father; a new scene was then opened 
to him, and for some time he hesitated what course to pursue.
Old Mr Belfield, though he lived in great affluence, left not behind him any 
considerable fortune, after the portions of his daughters, to each of whom he 
bequeathed L2000, had been deducted from it. But his stock in trade was great, 
and his business was prosperous and lucrative.
His son, however, did not merely want application and fortitude to become his 
successor, but skill and knowledge; his deliberation, therefore, was hasty, and 
his resolution improvident; he determined to continue at the Temple himself, 
while the shop, which he could by no means afford to relinquish, should be kept 
up by another name, and the business of it be transacted by an agent; hoping 
thus to secure and enjoy its emoluments, without either the trouble or the 
humiliation of attendance.
But this scheme, like most others that have their basis in vanity, ended in 
nothing but mortification and disappointment: the shop which under old Mr. 
Belfield had been flourishing and successful, and enriched himself and all his 
family, could now scarce support the expences of an individual. Without a 
master, without that diligent attention to its prosperity which the interest of 
possession alone can give, and the authority of a principal alone can enforce, 
it quickly lost its fame for the excellence of its goods, and soon after its 
customers from the report of its declension. The produce, therefore, diminished 
every month; he was surprised, he was provoked; he was convinced he was 
cheated, and that his affairs were neglected; but though he threatened from 
time to time to enquire into the real state of the business, and investigate 
the cause of its decay, he felt himself inadequate to the task; and now first 
lamented that early contempt of trade, which by preventing him acquiring some 
knowledge of it while he had youth and opportunity, made him now ignorant what 
redress to seek, though certain of imposition and injury.
But yet, however disturbed by alarming suggestions in his hours of retirement, 
no alteration was made in the general course of his life; he was still the 
darling of his friends, and the leader in all parties, and still, though his 
income was lessened, his expences encreased.
Such were his circumstances at the time Cecilia first saw him at the house of 
Mr. Monckton: from which, two days after her arrival in town, he was himself 
summoned, by an information that his agent had suddenly left the kingdom.
The fatal consequence of this fraudulent elopement was immediate bankruptcy.
His spirits, however, did not yet fail him; as he had never been the nominal 
master of the shop, he escaped all dishonour from its ruin, and was satisfied 
to consign what remained to the mercy of the creditors, so that his own name 
should not appear in the Gazette.
Three of his sisters were already extremely well married to reputable 
tradesmen; the two elder of those who were yet single were settled with two of 
those who were married, and Henrietta, the youngest, resided with her mother, 
who had a comfortable annuity, and a small house at Padington.
Bereft thus through vanity and imprudence of all the long labours of his 
father, he was now compelled to think seriously of some actual method of 
maintenance; since his mother, though willing to sacrifice to him even the 
nourishment which sustained her, could do for him but little, and that little 
he had too much justice to accept. The law, even to the most diligent and 
successful, is extremely slow of profit, and whatever, from his connections and 
abilities might be hoped hereafter, at present required an expence which he was 
no longer able to support.
It remained then to try his influence with his friends among the great and the 
powerful.
His canvas proved extremely honourable; every one promised something, and all 
seemed delighted to have an opportunity of serving him.
Pleased with finding the world so much better than report had made it, he now 
saw the conclusion of his difficulties in the prospect of a place at court.
Belfield, with half the penetration with which he was gifted, would have seen 
in any other man the delusive idleness of expectations no better founded; but 
though discernment teaches us the folly of others, experience singly can teach 
us our own! he flattered himself that his friends had been more wisely selected 
than the friends of those who in similar circumstances had been beguiled, and 
he suspected not the fraud of his vanity, till he found his invitations daily 
slacken, and that his time was at his own command.
All his hopes now rested upon one friend and patron,
Mr Floyer, an uncle of Sir Robert Floyer, a man of power in the royal 
household, with whom he had lived in great intimacy, and who at this period had 
the disposal of a place which he solicited. The only obstacle that seemed in 
his way was from Sir Robert himself, who warmly exerted his interest in favour 
of a friend of his own. Mr Floyer, however, assured Belfield of the preference, 
and only begged his patience till he could find some opportunity of appeasing 
his nephew.
And this was the state of his affairs at the time of his quarrel at the 
Opera-house. Already declared opponents of each other, Sir Robert felt double 
wrath that for him Cecilia should reject his civilities; while Belfield, 
suspecting he presumed upon his known dependence on his uncle to affront him, 
felt also double indignation at the haughtiness of his behaviour. And thus, 
slight as seemed to the world the cause of their contest, each had private 
motives of animosity that served to stimulate revenge.
The very day after this duel, Mr Floyer wrote him word that he was now obliged 
in common decency to take the part of his nephew, and therefore had already 
given the place to the friend he had recommended.
This was the termination of his hopes, and the signal of his ruin! To the pain 
of his wound he became insensible, from the superior pain of this unexpected 
miscarriage; yet his pride still enabled him to disguise his distress, and to 
see all the friends whom this accident induced to seek him, while from the 
sprightliness he forced in order to conceal his anguish, he appeared to them 
more lively and more entertaining than ever.
But these efforts, when left to himself and to nature, only sunk him the deeper 
in sadness; he found an immediate change in his way of life was necessary, yet 
could not brook to make it in sight of those with whom he had so long lived in 
all the brilliancy of equality. A high principle of honour which still, in the 
midst of his gay career, had remained uncorrupted, had scrupulously guarded him 
from running in debt, and therefore, though of little possessed, that little 
was strictly his own. He now published that he was going out of town for the 
benefit of purer air, discharged his surgeon, took a gay leave of his friends, 
and trusting no one with his secret but his servant, was privately conveyed to 
mean and cheap lodgings in Swallow-street.
Here, shut up from every human being he had formerly known, he purposed to 
remain till he grew better, and then again to seek his fortune in the army.
His present situation, however, was little calculated to contribute to his 
recovery; the dismission of the surgeon, the precipitation of his removal, the 
inconveniencies of his lodgings, and the unseasonable deprivation of long 
customary indulgencies, were unavoidable delays of his amendment; while the 
mortification of his present disgrace, and the bitterness of his late 
disappointment, preyed incessantly upon his mind, robbed him of rest, 
heightened his fever, and reduced him by degrees to a state so low and 
dangerous, that his servant, alarmed for his life, secretly acquainted his 
mother with his illness and retreat.
The mother, almost distracted by this intelligence, instantly, with her 
daughter, flew to his lodgings. She wished to have taken him immediately to her 
house at Padington, but he had suffered so much from his first removal, that he 
would not consent to another. She would then have called in a physician, but he 
refused even to see one; and she had too long given way to all his desires and 
opinions, to have now the force of mind for exerting the requisite authority of 
issuing her orders without consulting him.
She begged, she pleaded, indeed, and Henrietta joined in her entreaties; but 
sickness and vexation had not rendered him tame, though they had made him 
sullen: he resisted their prayers, and commonly silenced them by assurances 
that their opposition to the plan he had determined to pursue, only inflamed 
his fever, and retarded his recovery.
The motive of an obduracy so cruel to his friends was the fear of a detection 
which he thought not merely prejudicial to his affairs, but dishonourable to 
his character: for, without betraying any symptom of his distress, he had taken 
a general leave of his acquaintance upon pretence of going out of town, and he 
could ill endure to make a discovery which would at once proclaim his 
degradation and his deceit.
Mr. Albany had accidentally broken in upon him, by mistaking his room for that 
of another sick person in the same house, to whom his visit had been intended; 
but as he knew and reverenced that old gentleman, he did not much repine at his 
intrusion.
He was not so easy when the same discovery was made by young Delvile, who, 
chancing to meet his servant in the street, enquired concerning his master's 
health, and surprising from him its real state, followed him home; where, soon 
certain of the change in his affairs by the change of his habitation, he wrote 
him a letter, in which, after apologizing for his freedom, he warmly declared 
that nothing could make him so happy as being favoured with his commands, if, 
either through himself or his friends, he could be so fortunate as to do him 
any service.
Belfield, deeply mortified at this detection of his situation, returned only a 
verbal answer of cold thanks, and desired he would not speak of his being in 
town, as he was not well enough to be seen.
This reply gave almost equal mortification to young Delvile, who continued, 
however, to call at the door with enquiries how he went on, though he made no 
further attempt to see him.
Belfield, softened at length by the kindness of this conduct, determined to 
admit him; and he was just come from paying his first visit, when he was met by 
Cecilia upon the stairs.
His stay with him had been short, and he had taken no notice either of his 
change of abode, or his pretence of going into the country; he had talked to 
him only in general terms, and upon general subjects, till he arose to depart, 
and then he re-urged his offers of service with so much openness and warmth, 
that Belfield, affected by his earnestness, promised he would soon see him 
again, and intimated to his delighted mother and sister, that he would frankly 
consult with him upon his affairs.
Such was the tale which, with various minuter circumstances, Miss Belfield 
communicated to Cecilia. "My mother," she added, "who never quits him, knows 
that you are here, madam, for she heard me talking with somebody yesterday, and 
she made me tell her all that had passed, and that you said you would come 
again this morning."
Cecilia returned many acknowledgments for this artless and unreserved 
communication, but could not, when it was over, forbear enquiring by what early 
misery she had already, though so very young, spent two years in nothing but 
unhappiness?
"Because," she answered, "when my poor father died all our family separated, 
and I left every body to go and live with my mother at Padington; and I was 
never a favourite with my mother—no more, indeed, was any body but my 
brother, for she thinks all the rest of the world only made for his sake. So 
she used to deny both herself and me almost common necessaries, in order to 
save up money to make him presents: though, if he had known how it was done, he 
would only have been angry instead of taking them. However, I should have 
regarded nothing that had but been for his benefit, for I loved him a great 
deal more than my own convenience; but sums that would distress us for months 
to save up, would by him be spent in a day, and then thought of no more! Nor 
was that all—O no! I had much greater uneasiness to suffer; for I was 
informed by one of my brothers-in-law how ill every thing went, and that 
certain ruin would come to my poor brother from the treachery of his agent; and 
the thought of this was always preying upon my mind, for I did not dare tell it 
my mother, for fear it should put her out of humour, for, sometimes, she is not 
very patient; and it mattered little what any of us said to my brother, for he 
was too gay and too confident to believe his danger."
"Well but," said Cecilia, "I hope, now, all will go better; if your brother 
will consent to see a physician—"
"Ah, madam! that is the thing I fear he never will do, because of being seen in 
these bad lodgings. I would kneel whole days to prevail with him, but he is 
unused to controul, and knows not how to submit to it; and he has lived so long 
among the great, that he forgets he was not born as high as themselves. Oh that 
he had never quitted his own family! If he had not been spoilt by ambition, he 
had the best heart and sweetest disposition in the world. But living always 
with his superiors, taught him to disdain his own relations, and be ashamed of 
us all; and yet now, in the hour of his distress—who else comes to help him?"
Cecilia then enquired if she wanted not assistance for herself and her mother, 
observing that they did not seem to have all the conveniencies to which they 
were entitled.
"Why indeed, madam," she replied, with an ingenuous smile, "when you first came 
here I was a little like my brother, for I was sadly ashamed to let you see how 
ill we lived! but now you know the worst, so I shall fret about it no more."
"But this cannot be your usual way of life; I fear the misfortunes of Mr 
Belfield have spread a ruin wider than his own."
"No indeed; he took care from the first not to involve us in his hazards, for 
he is very generous, madam, and very noble in all his notions, and could behave 
to us all no better about money matters than he has ever done. But from the 
moment we came to this dismal place, and saw his distress, and that he was sunk 
so low who used always to be higher than any of us, we had a sad scene indeed! 
My poor mother, whose whole delight was to think that he lived like a nobleman, 
and who always flattered herself that he would rise to be as great as the 
company he kept, was so distracted with her disappointment, that she would not 
listen to reason, but immediately discharged both our servants, said she and I 
should do all the work ourselves, hired this poor room for us to live in, and 
sent to order a bill to be put upon her house at Padington, for she said she 
would never return to it any more."
"But are you, then," cried Cecilia, "without any servant?"
"We have my brother's man, madam, and so he lights our fires, and takes away 
some of our litters; and there is not much else to be done, except sweeping the 
rooms, for we eat nothing but cold meat from the cook shops."
"And how long is this to last?"
"Indeed I cannot tell; for the real truth is, my poor mother has almost lost 
her senses; and ever since our coming here, she has been so miserable and so 
complaining, that indeed, between her and my brother, I have almost lost mine 
too! For when she found all her hopes at an end, and that her darling son, 
instead of being rich and powerful, and surrounded by friends and admirers, all 
trying who should do the most for him, was shut up by himself in this poor 
little lodging, and instead of gaining more, had spent all he was worth at 
first, with not a creature to come near him, though ill, though confined, 
though keeping his bed!—Oh madam, had you seen my poor mother when she first 
cast her eyes upon him in that condition!—indeed you could never have 
forgotten it!"
"I wonder not at her disappointment," cried Cecilia; "with expectations so 
sanguine, and a son of so much merit, it might well indeed be bitter."
"Yes, and besides the disappointment, she is now continually reproaching 
herself for always complying with his humours, and assisting him to appear 
better than the rest of his family, though my father never approved her doing 
so. But she thought herself so sure of his rising, that she believed we should 
all thank her for it in the end. And she always used to say that he was born to 
be a gentleman, and what a grievous thing it would be to have him made a 
tradesman."
"I hope, at least, she has not the additional misery of seeing him ungrateful 
for her fondness, however injudicious it may have been?"
"O no! he does nothing but comfort and cheer her! and indeed it is very good of 
him, for he has owned to me in private, that but for her encouragement, he 
could not have run the course he has run, for he should have been obliged to 
enter into business, whether he had liked it or not. But my poor mother knows 
this, though he will not tell it her, and therefore she says that unless he 
gets well, she will punish herself all the rest of her life, and never go back 
to her house, and never hire another servant, and never eat any thing but 
bread, nor drink any thing but water!"
"Poor unhappy woman!" cried Cecilia, "how dearly does she pay for her imprudent 
and short-sighted indulgence! but surely you are not also to suffer in the same 
manner?"
"No, madam, not by her fault, for she wants me to go and live with one of my 
sisters: but I would not quit her for the world; I should think myself wicked 
indeed to leave her now. Besides, I don't at all repine at the little hardships 
I go through at present, because my poor brother is in so much distress, that 
all we save may be really turned to account; but when we lived so hardly only 
to procure him luxuries he had no right to, I must own I used often to think it 
unfair, and if I had not loved him dearly, I should not have borne it so well, 
perhaps, as I ought."
Cecilia now began to think it high time to release her new acquaintance by 
quitting her, though she felt herself so much interested in her affairs, that 
every word she spoke gave her a desire to lengthen the conversation. She 
ardently wished to make her some present, but was restrained by the fear of 
offending, or of being again refused; she had, however, devised a private 
scheme for serving her more effectually than by the donation of a few guineas, 
and therefore, after earnestly begging to hear from her if she could possibly 
be of any use, she told her that she should not find her confidence misplaced, 
and promising again to see her soon, reluctantly departed.





