
The scheme now projected by Cecilia, was to acquaint the surgeon who had 
already attended Mr. Belfield with his present situation and address, and to 
desire him to continue his visits, for the payment of which she would herself 
be accountable.
The raillery of young Delvile, however, had taught her to fear the 
constructions of the world, and she therefore purposed to keep both the surgeon 
and Mr Belfield ignorant to whom they were indebted. She was aware, indeed, 
that whatever might be her management, that high-spirited and unfortunate young 
man would be extremely hurt to find himself thus detected and pursued; but she 
thought his life too well worth preserving to let it be sacrificed to his 
pride, and her internal conviction of being herself the immediate cause of its 
present danger, gave to her an anxious and restless desire to be herself the 
means of extricating him from it.
Rupil, the name of the surgeon, she had already heard mentioned by Mr. Arnott, 
and in getting into her chair, she ordered Ralph, her man, to enquire where he 
lived.
"I know already where he lives, madam," answered Ralph, "for I saw his name 
over a door in Cavendish-street, Oxford-road; I took particular notice of it, 
because it was at the house where you stood up that day on account of the mob 
that was waiting to see the malefactors go to Tyburn."
This answer unravelled to Cecilia a mystery which had long perplext her; for 
the speeches of young Delvile when he had surprised her in that situation were 
now fully explained. In seeing her come out of the surgeon's house, he had 
naturally concluded she had only entered it to ask news of his patient, Mr. 
Belfield; her protestations of merely standing up to avoid the crowd, he had 
only laughed at; and his hints at her reserve and dissimulation, were meant but 
to reproach her for refusing his offer of procuring her intelligence, at the 
very time when, to all appearance, she anxiously, though clandestinely, sought 
it for herself.
This discovery, notwithstanding it relieved her from all suspense of his 
meaning, gave her much vexation: to be supposed to take an interest so ardent, 
yet so private, in the affairs of Mr Belfield, might well authorise all 
suspicions of her partiality for him: and even if any doubt had yet remained, 
the unlucky meeting upon the stairs at his lodgings, would not fail to dispel 
it, and confirm the notion of her secret regard. She hoped, however, to have 
soon some opportunity of clearing up the mistake, and resolved in the mean time 
to be studiously cautious in avoiding all appearances that might strengthen it.
No caution, however, and no apprehension, could intimidate her active humanity 
from putting into immediate execution a plan in which she feared any delay 
might be fatal; and therefore the moment she got home, she wrote the following 
note to the surgeon.
"To———Rupil, Esq.
"March 27, 1779.
"A friend of Mr Belfield begs Mr Rupil will immediately call upon that 
gentleman, who is in lodgings about the middle of Swallow-street, and insist 
upon visiting him till he is perfectly recovered. Mr Rupil is entreated not to 
make known this request, nor to receive from Mr Belfield any return for his 
attendance; but to attribute the discovery of his residence to accident, and to 
rest assured he shall be amply recompensed for his time and trouble by the 
friend who makes this application, and who is willing to give any security that 
Mr Rupil shall think proper to mention, for the performance of this engagement."
Her next difficulty was in what manner to have this note conveyed; to send her 
own servant was inevitably betraying herself, to employ any other was risking a 
confidence that might be still more dangerous, and she could not trust to the 
penny-post, as her proposal required an answer. After much deliberation, she at 
length determined to have recourse to Mrs Hill, to whose services she was 
entitled, and upon whose fidelity she could rely.
The morning was already far advanced, but the Harrels dined late, and she would 
not lose a day where even an hour might be of importance. She went therefore 
immediately to Mrs. Hill, whom she found already removed into her new 
habitation in Fetter-lane, and equally busy and happy in the change of scene 
and of employment. She gave to her the note, which she desired her to carry to 
Cavendish-street directly, and either to deliver it into Mr. Rupil's own hands, 
or to bring it back if he was out; but upon no consideration to make known 
whence or from whom it came.
She then went into the back part of the shop, which by Mrs. Roberts was called 
the parlour, and amused herself during the absence of her messenger, by playing 
with the children.
Mrs. Hill at her return said she had found Mr. Rupil at home, and as she 
refused to give the letter to the servant, she had been taken into a room where 
he was talking with a gentleman, to whom, as soon as he had read it, he said 
with a laugh, "Why here's another person with the same proposal as yours! 
however, I shall treat you both alike." And then he wrote an answer, which he 
sealed up, and bid her take care of. This answer was as follows:
"Mr. Rupil will certainly attend Mr. Belfield, whose friends may be satisfied 
he will do all in his power to recover him, without receiving any recompense 
but the pleasure of serving a gentleman who is so much beloved."
Cecilia, charmed at this unhoped for success, was making further enquiries into 
what had passed, when Mrs Hill, in a low voice, said, "There's the gentleman, 
madam, who was with Mr. Rupil when I gave him the letter. I had a notion he was 
dodging me all the way I came, for I saw him just behind me, turn which way I 
would."
Cecilia then looked—and perceived young Delvile! who, after stopping a moment 
at the door, came into the shop, and desired to be shewn some gloves, which, 
among other things, were laid in the window.
Extremely disconcerted at the sight of him, she began now almost to fancy there 
was some fatality attending her acquaintance with him, since she was always 
sure of meeting, when she had any reason to wish avoiding him.
As soon as he saw he was observed by her, he bowed with the utmost respect: she 
coloured in returning the salutation, and prepared, with no little vexation, 
for another attack, and further {raillery}, similar to what she had already 
received from him: but, as soon as he had made his purchase, he bowed to her 
again, and, without speaking, left the shop.
A silence so unexpected at once astonished and disturbed her; she again desired 
to hear all that had passed at Mr. Rupil's, and from the relation gathered that 
Delvile had himself undertaken to be responsible for his attendance upon Mr. 
Belfield.
A liberality so like her own failed not to impress her with the most lively 
esteem: but this served rather to augment than lessen the pain with which she 
considered the clandestine appearance she thus repeatedly made to him. She had 
no doubt he had immediately concluded she was author of the application to the 
surgeon, and that he followed her messenger merely to ascertain the fact; while 
his silence when he had made the discovery, she could only attribute to his now 
believing that her regard for Mr Belfield was too serious for raillery.
Doubly, however, she rejoiced at the generosity of Mr Rupil, as it rendered 
wholly unnecessary her further interference: for she now saw with some alarm 
the danger to which benevolence itself, directed towards a youthful object, 
might expose her.





