
Cecilia returned home so late, that she was summoned to the dining parlour the 
moment she entered the house. Her morning dress, and her long absence, excited 
much curiosity in Mrs Harrel, which a quick succession of questions evasively 
answered soon made general; and Sir Robert Floyer, turning to her with a look 
of surprise, said, "If you have such freaks as these, Miss Beverley, I must 
begin to enquire a little more into your proceedings."
"That, Sir," said Cecilia, very coldly, "would ill repay your trouble."
"When we get her to Violet Bank," cried Mr Harrel, "we shall be able to keep a 
better watch over her."
"I hope so," answered Sir Robert; "though faith she has been so demure, that I 
never supposed she did any thing but read sermons. However, I find there's no 
going upon trust with women, any more than with money."
"Ay, Sir Robert," cried Mrs Harrel, "you know I always advised you not to be 
quite so easy, and I am sure I really think you deserve a little severity, for 
not being more afraid."
"Afraid of what, madam?" cried the baronet; "of a young lady's walking out 
without me? Do you think I wish to be any restraint upon Miss Beverley's time 
in a morning, while I have the happiness of waiting upon her every afternoon?"
Cecilia was thunderstruck by this speech, which not only expressed an open 
avowal of his pretensions, but a confident security of his success. She was 
shocked that a man of such principles should even for a moment presume upon her 
favour, and irritated at the stubbornness of Mr. Harrel in not acquainting him 
with her refusal.
His intimation of coming to the house for the happiness of waiting upon her, 
made her determine, without losing a moment, to seek herself an explanation 
with him: while the discovery that he was included in the Easter party, which 
various other concomitant causes had already rendered disagreeable to her, made 
her look forward to that purposed expedition with nothing but unwillingness and 
distaste.
But though her earnestness to conclude this affair made her now put herself 
voluntarily in the way of the baronet, she found her plan always counteracted 
by Mr. Harrel, who, with an officiousness too obvious to pass for chance, 
constantly stopt the progress of any discourse in which he did not himself bear 
a part. A more passionate admirer might not have been so easily defeated; but 
Sir Robert, too proud for solicitation, and too indolent for assiduity, was 
very soon checked, because very soon wearied.
The whole evening, therefore, to her infinite mortification, passed away 
without affording her any opportunity of making known to him his mistake.
Her next effort was to remonstrate with Mr. Harrel himself; but this scheme was 
not more easy of execution than the other, since Mr. Harrel, suspecting she 
meant again to dun him for her money, avoided all separate conversation with 
her so skilfully, that she could not find a moment to make him hear her.
She then resolved to apply to his lady; but here her success was not better: 
Mrs. Harrel, dreading another lecture upon economy, peevishly answered to her 
request of a conference, that she was not very well, and could not talk gravely.
Cecilia, justly offended with them all, had now no resource but in Mr. 
Monckton, whose counsel for effectually dismissing the baronet, she determined 
to solicit by the first opportunity.
The moment, therefore, that she next saw him, she acquainted him with the 
speeches of Sir Robert and the behaviour of Mr. Harrel.
There needed no rhetoric to point out to Mr. Monckton the danger of suffering 
such expectations, or the impropriety of her present situation: he was struck 
with both in a manner the most forcible, and spared not for warmth of 
expression to alarm her delicacy, or add to her displeasure. But chiefly he was 
exasperated against Mr. Harrel, assuring her there could be no doubt but that 
he had some particular interest in so strenuously and artfully supporting the 
pretensions of Sir Robert. Cecilia endeavoured to refute this opinion, which 
she regarded as proceeding rather from prejudice than justice; but when she 
mentioned that the baronet was invited to spent the Easter holidays at 
Violet-Bank, he represented with such energy the consequent constructions of 
the world, as well as the unavoidable encouragement such intimacy would imply, 
that he terrified her into an earnest entreaty to suggest to her some way of 
deliverance.
"There is only one;" answered he, "you must peremptorily refuse to go to Violet 
Bank yourself. If, after what has passed, you are included in the same party 
with Sir Robert, you give a sanction yourself to the reports already circulated 
of your engagements with I and the effect of such a sanction will be more 
serious than you can easily imagine, since the knowledge that a connection is 
believed in the world, frequently, if not generally, leads by imperceptible 
degrees to its real ratification."
Cecilia, with the utmost alacrity, promised implicitly to follow his advice, 
whatever might be the opposition of Mr Harrel. He quitted her, therefore, with 
unusual satisfaction, happy in his power over her mind, and anticipating with 
secret rapture the felicity he had in reserve from visiting her during the 
absence of the family.
As no private interview was necessary for making known her intention of giving 
up the Easter party, which was to take place in two days' time, she mentioned 
next morning her design of spending the holidays in town, when Mr Harrel 
sauntered into the breakfast room to give some commission to his lady.
At first he only laughed at her plan, gaily rallying her upon her love of 
solitude; but when he found it was serious, he very warmly opposed it, and 
called upon Mrs Harrel to join in his expostulations. That lady complied, but 
in so faint a manner, that Cecilia soon saw she did not wish to prevail; and 
with a concern, that cost her infinite pain, now finally perceived that not 
only all her former affection was subsided into indifference, but that, since 
she had endeavoured to abridge her amusements, she regarded her as a spy, and 
dreaded her as the censor of her conduct.
Mean while Mr Arnott, who was present, though he interfered not in the debate, 
waited the event with anxiety; naturally hoping her objections arose from her 
dislike of Sir Robert, and secretly resolving to be guided himself by her 
motions. Cecilia at length, tired of the importunities of Mr Harrel, gravely 
said, that if he desired to hear the reasons which obliged her to refuse his 
request, she was ready to communicate them.
Mr Harrel, after a little hesitation, accompanied her into another room.
She then declared her resolution not to live under the same roof with Sir 
Robert, and very openly expressed her vexation and displeasure, that he so 
evidently persisted in giving that gentleman encouragement.
"My dear Miss Beverley," answered he, carelessly, "when young ladies will not 
know their own minds, it is necessary some friend should tell it them: you were 
certainly very favourable to Sir Robert but a short time ago, and so, I dare 
say, you will be again, when you have seen more of him."
"You amaze me, Sir!" cried Cecilia: "when was I favourable to him? Has he not 
always and regularly been my aversion?"
"I fancy," answered Mr Harrel, laughing, "you will not easily persuade him to 
think so; your behaviour at the Opera-house was ill calculated to give him that 
notion."
"My behaviour at the Opera-house, Sir, I have already explained to you; and if 
Sir Robert himself has any doubts, either from that circumstance or from any 
other, pardon me if I say they can only be attributed to your unwillingness to 
remove them. I entreat you, therefore, to trifle with him no longer, nor to 
subject me again to the freedom of implications extremely disagreeable to me."
"O fie, fie, Miss Beverley! after all that has passed, after his long 
expectations, and his constant attendance, you cannot for a moment think 
seriously of discarding him."
Cecilia, equally surprised and provoked by this speech, could not for a moment 
tell how to answer it; and Mr Harrel, wilfully misinterpreting her silence, 
took her hand, and said, "Come, I am sure you have too much, honour to make a 
fool of such a man as Sir Robert Floyer. There is not a woman in town who will 
not envy your choice, and I assure you there is not a man in England I would so 
soon recommend to you."
He would then have hurried her back to the next room; but, drawing away her 
hand with undisguised resentment, "No, Sir," she cried, "this must not pass! my 
positive rejection of Sir Robert the instant you communicated to me his 
proposals, you can neither have forgotten nor mistaken: and you must not wonder 
if I acknowledge myself extremely disobliged by your unaccountable perseverance 
in refusing to receive my answer."
"Young ladies who have been brought up in the country," returned Mr Harrel, 
with his usual negligence, "are always so high flown in their notions, it is 
difficult to deal with them; but as I am much better acquainted with the world 
than you can be, you must give me leave to tell you, that if, after all, you 
refuse Sir Robert, it will be using him very ill."
"Why will you say so, Sir?" cried Cecilia, "when it is utterly impossible you 
can have formed so preposterous an opinion. Pray hear me, however, finally, and 
pray tell Sir Robert—"
"No, no," interrupted he, with affected gaiety, "you shall manage it all your 
own way; I will have nothing to do with the quarrels of lovers."
And then, with a pretended laugh, he hastily left her.
Cecilia was so much incensed by this impracticable behaviour, that instead of 
returning to the family, she went directly to her own room. It was easy for her 
to see that Mr Harrel was bent upon using every method he could devise, to 
entangle her into some engagement with Sir Robert, and though she could not 
imagine the meaning of such a scheme, the littleness of his behaviour excited 
her contempt, and the long-continued error of the baronet gave her the utmost 
uneasiness. She again determined to seek an explanation with him herself, and 
immovably to refuse joining the party to Violet Bank.
The following day, while the ladies and Mr Arnott were at breakfast, Mr Harrel 
came into the room to enquire if they should all be ready to set off for his 
villa by ten o'clock the next day. Mrs Harrel and her brother answered in the 
affirmative; but Cecilia was silent, and he turned to her and repeated his 
question.
"Do you think me so capricious, Sir," said she, "that after telling you but 
yesterday I could not be of your party, I shall tell you to-day that I can?"
"Why you do not really mean to remain in town by yourself?" replied he, "you 
cannot suppose that will be an eligible plan for a young lady. On the contrary, 
it will be so very improper, that I think myself, as your Guardian, obliged to 
oppose it."
Amazed at this authoritative speech, Cecilia looked at him with a mixture of 
mortification and anger; but knowing it would be vain to resist his power if he 
was resolute to exert it, she made not any answer.
"Besides," he continued, "I have a plan for some alterations in the house 
during my absence; and I think your room, in particular, will be much improved 
by them: but it will be impossible to employ any workmen, if we do not all quit 
the premises."
This determined persecution now seriously alarmed her; she saw that Mr Harrel 
would omit no expedient or stratagem to encourage the addresses of Sir Robert, 
and force her into his presence; and she began next to apprehend that her 
connivance in his conduct might be presumed upon by that gentleman: she 
resolved, therefore, as the last and only effort in her power for avoiding him, 
to endeavour to find an accommodation at the house of Mrs Delvile, during the 
excursion to Violet Bank: and if, when she returned to Portman-square, the 
baronet still persevered in his attendance, to entreat her friend Mr Monckton 
would take upon himself the charge of undeceiving him.





