
As not a moment was now to be lost, Cecilia had no sooner suggested this 
scheme, than she hastened to St James's-Square, to try its practicability.
She found Mrs Delvile alone, and still at breakfast.
After the first compliments were over, while she was considering in what manner 
to introduce her proposal, Mrs Delvile herself led to the subject, by saying, 
"I am very sorry to hear we are so soon to lose you; but I hope Mr Harrel does 
not intend to make any long stay at his villa; for if he does, I shall be half 
tempted to come and run away with you from him."
"And that," said Cecilia, delighted with this opening, "would be an honour I am 
more than half tempted to desire."
"Why indeed your leaving London at this time," continued Mrs Delvile, "is, for 
me, particularly unfortunate, as, if I could now be favoured with your visits, 
I should doubly value them; for Mr Delvile is gone to spend the holidays at the 
Duke of Derwent's, whither I was not well enough to accompany him; my son has 
his own engagements, and there are so few people I can bear to see, that I 
shall live almost entirely alone."
"If I," cried Cecilia, "in such a situation might hope to be admitted, how 
gladly for that happiness would I exchange my expedition to Violet Bank!"
"You are very good, and very amiable," said Mrs Devile, "and your society 
would, indeed, give me infinite satisfaction. Yet I am no enemy to solitude; on 
the contrary, company is commonly burthensome to me; I find few who have any 
power to give me entertainment, and even of those few, the chief part have in 
their manners, situation, or characters, an unfortunate something, that 
generally renders a near connection with them inconvenient or disagreeable. 
There are, indeed, so many drawbacks to regard and intimacy, from pride, from 
propriety, and various other collateral causes, that rarely as we meet with 
people of brilliant parts, there is almost ever some objection to our desire of 
meeting them again. Yet to live wholly alone is chearless and depressing; and 
with you, at least," taking Cecilia's hand, "I find not one single obstacle to 
oppose to a thousand inducements, which invite me to form a friendship that I 
can only hope may be as lasting, as I am sure it will be pleasant."
Cecilia expressed her sense of this partiality in the warmest terms; and Mrs 
Delvile, soon discovering by her manner that she took not any delight in her 
intended visit to Violet Bank, began next to question her whether it would be 
possible for her to give it up.
She instantly answered in the affirmative.
"And would you really be so obliging," cried Mrs Delvile, with some surprise, 
"as to bestow upon me the time you had destined for this gay excursion?"
"Most willingly," answered Cecilia, "if you are so good as to wish it."
"But can you also—for you must by no means remain alone in Portman 
Square—manage to live entirely in my house till Mr Barrel's return?"
To this proposal, which was what she most desired, Cecilia gave a glad assent; 
and Mrs Delvile, extremely pleased with her compliance, promised to have an 
apartment prepared for her immediately.
She then hastened home, to announce her new plan.
This she took occasion to do when the family was assembled at dinner. The 
surprize with which she was heard was very general: Sir Robert seemed at a loss 
what conclusion to draw from her information; Mr Arnott was half elated with 
pleasure, and half depressed with apprehension; Mrs Harrel wondered, without 
any other sensation; and Mr Harrel himself was evidently the most concerned of 
the party.
Every effort of persuasion and importunity he now essayed to prevail upon her 
to give up this scheme, and still accompany them to the villa; but she coolly 
answered that her engagement with Mrs Delvile was decided, and she had 
appointed to wait upon her the next morning.
When her resolution was found so steady, a general ill humour took place of 
surprise: Sir Robert now had the air of a man who thought himself affronted; Mr 
Arnott was wretched from a thousand uncertainties; Mrs Harrel, indeed, was 
still the most indifferent; but Mr Harrel could hardly repress his 
disappointment and anger.
Cecilia, however, was all gaiety and pleasure: in removing only from the house 
of one guardian to another, she knew she could not be opposed; and the 
flattering readiness with which Mrs Delvile had anticipated her request, 
without enquiring into her motives, had relieved her from a situation which now 
grew extremely distressing, without giving to her the pain of making complaints 
of Mr Harrel. The absence of Mr Delvile contributed to her happiness, and she 
much rejoiced in having now the prospect of a speedy opportunity to explain to 
his son, whatever had appeared mysterious in her conduct respecting Mr 
Belfield. If she had any thing to regret, it was merely the impossibility, at 
this time, of waiting for the counsel of Mr Monckton.
The next morning, while the family was in the midst of preparation for 
departure, she took leave of Mrs Harrel, who faintly lamented the loss of her 
company, and then hastily made her compliments to Mr Harrel and Mr Arnott, and 
putting herself into a chair, was conveyed to her new habitation.
Mrs Delvile received her with the most distinguished politeness; she conducted 
her to the apartment which had been prepared for her, led her to the library, 
which she desired her to make use of as her own, and gave her the most obliging 
charges to remember that she was in a house of which she had the command.
Young Delvile did not make his appearance till dinner time. Cecilia, from 
recollecting the strange situations in which she had lately been seen by him, 
blushed extremely when she first met his eyes; but finding him gay and easy, 
general in his conversation, and undesigning in his looks, she soon recovered 
from her embarrassment, and passed the rest of the day without restraint or 
uneasiness.
Every hour she spent with Mrs Delvile, contributed to raise in her esteem the 
mind and understanding of that lady. She found, indeed, that it was not for 
nothing she was accused of pride, but she found at the same time so many 
excellent qualities, so much true dignity of mind, and so noble a spirit of 
liberality, that however great was the respect she seemed to demand, it was 
always inferior to what she felt inclined to pay.
Nor was young Delvile less rapid in the progress he made in her favour; his 
character, upon every opportunity of shewing it, rose in her opinion, and his 
disposition and manners had a mingled sweetness and vivacity that rendered his 
society attractive, and his conversation spirited.
Here, therefore, Cecilia experienced that happiness she so long had coveted in 
vain: her life was neither public nor private, her amusements were neither 
dissipated nor retired; the company she saw were either people of high rank or 
strong parts, and their visits were neither frequent nor long. The situation 
she quitted gave a zest to that into which she entered, for she was now no 
longer shocked by extravagance or levity, no longer tormented with addresses 
which disgusted her, nor mortified by the ingratitude of the friend she had 
endeavoured to serve. All was smooth and serene, yet lively and interesting.
Her plan, however, of clearing to young Delvile his mistakes concerning 
Belfield, she could not put in execution; for he now never led to the subject, 
though he was frequently alone with her, nor seemed at all desirous to renew 
his former raillery, or repeat his enquiries. She wondered at this change in 
him, but chose rather to wait the revival of his own curiosity, than to 
distress or perplex herself by contriving methods of explanation.
Situated thus happily, she had now one only anxiety, which was to know whether, 
and in what manner, Mr Belfield had received his surgeon, as well as the actual 
state of his own and his sister's affairs: but the fear of again encountering 
young Delvile in suspicious circumstances, deterred her at present from going 
to their house. Yet her natural benevolence, which partial convenience never 
lulled to sleep, impressing her with an apprehension that her services might be 
wanted, she was induced to write to Miss Belfield, though she forbore to visit 
her.
Her letter was short, but kind and to the purpose: she apologized for her 
officiousness, desiring to know if her brother was better, and entreated her, 
in terms the most delicate, to acquaint her if yet she would accept from her 
any assistance.
She sent this letter by her servant, who, after waiting a considerable time, 
brought her the following answer.
To Miss Beverley.
Ah madam! your goodness quite melts me! we want nothing, however, yet, though I 
fear we shall not say so much longer. But though I hope I shall never forget 
myself so as to be proud and impertinent, I will rather struggle with any 
hardship than beg, for I will not disoblige my poor brother by any fault that I 
can help, especially now he is fallen so low. But, thank heaven, his wound has 
at last been dressed, for the surgeon has found him out, and he attends him for 
nothing; though my brother is willing to part with every thing he is worth in 
the world, rather than owe that obligation to him: yet I often wonder why he 
hates so to be obliged, for when he was rich himself he was always doing 
something to oblige other people. But I fear the surgeon thinks him very bad! 
for he won't speak to us when we follow him down stairs.
I am sadly ashamed to send this bad writing, but I dare not ask my brother for 
any help, because he would only be angry that I wrote any thing about him at 
all; but indeed I have seen too little good come of pride to think of imitating 
it; and as I have not his genius, I am sure there is no need I should have his 
defects: ill, therefore, as I write, you, madam, who have so much goodness and 
gentleness, would forgive it, I believe, if it was worse, almost. And though we 
are not in need of your kind offers, it is a great comfort to me to think there 
is a lady in the world that, if we come to be quite destitute, and if the proud 
heart of my poor unhappy brother should be quite broke down, will look upon our 
distress with pity, and generously help us from quite sinking under it.—I 
remain, Madam, with the most humble respect, your ever most obliged humble 
servant, HENRIETTA BELFIELD.
Cecilia, much moved by the simplicity of this letter, determined that her very 
first visit from Portman-square should be to its fair and innocent writer. And 
having now an assurance that she was in no immediate distress, and that her 
brother was actually under Mr Rupil's care, she dismissed from her mind the 
only subject of uneasiness that at present had endeavoured to disturb it, and 
gave herself wholly up to the delightful serenity of {unalloyed} happiness.
Few are the days of felicity unmixed which we acknowledge while we experience, 
though many are those we deplore, when by sorrow taught their value, and by 
misfortune, their loss. Time with Cecilia now glided on with such rapidity, 
that before she thought the morning half over, the evening was closed, and ere 
she was sensible the first week was past, the second was departed for ever. 
More and more pleased with the inmates of her new habitation, she found in the 
abilities of Mrs Delvile sources inexhaustible of entertainment, and, in the 
disposition and sentiments of her son something so concordant to her own, that 
almost every word he spoke shewed the sympathy of their minds, and almost every 
look which caught her eyes was a reciprocation of intelligence. Her heart, 
deeply wounded of late by unexpected indifference, and unreserved 
mortification, was now, perhaps, more than usually susceptible of those 
penetrating and exquisite pleasures which friendship and kindness possess the 
highest powers of bestowing. Easy, gay, and airy, she only rose to happiness, 
and only retired to rest; and not merely heightened was her present enjoyment 
by her past disappointment, but, carrying her retrospection to her earliest 
remembrance, she still found her actual situation more peculiarly adapted to 
her taste and temper, than any she had hitherto at any time experienced.
The very morning that the destined fortnight was elapsed, she received a note 
from Mrs Harrel, with information of her arrival in town, and an entreaty that 
she would return to Portman-square.
Cecilia, who, thus happy, had forgot to mark the progress of time, was now all 
amazement to find the term of her absence so soon past. She thought of going 
back with the utmost reluctance, and of quitting her new abode with the most 
lively regret. The representations of Mr Monckton daily lost their force, and 
notwithstanding her dislike of Mr Delvile, she had no wish so earnest as that 
of being settled in his family for the rest of her minority.
To effect this was her next thought; yet she knew not how to make the proposal, 
but from the uncommon partiality of Mrs Delvile, she hoped, with a very little 
encouragement, she would lead to it herself.
Here, however, she was disappointed; Mrs Delvile, when she heard of the summons 
from the Harrels, expressed her sorrow at losing her in terms of the most 
flattering regret, yet seemed to think the parting indispensable, and dropt not 
the most distant hint of attempting to prevent it.
Cecilia, vexed and disconcerted, then made arrangements for her departure, 
which she fixed for the next morning.
The rest of this day, unlike every other which for the last fortnight had 
preceded it, was passed with little appearance, and no reality of satisfaction: 
Mrs Delvile was evidently concerned, her son openly avowed his chagrin, and 
Cecilia felt the utmost mortification; yet, though every one was discontented, 
no effort was made towards obtaining any delay.
The next morning during breakfast, Mrs Delvile very elegantly thanked her for 
granting to her so much of her time, and earnestly begged to see her in future 
whenever she could be spared from her other friends; protesting she was now so 
accustomed to her society, that she should require both long and frequent 
visits to soften the separation. This request was very eagerly seconded by 
young Delvile, who warmly spoke his satisfaction that his mother had found so 
charming a friend, and unaffectedly joined in her entreaties that the intimacy 
might be still more closely cemented.
Cecilia had no great difficulty in according her compliance to those demands, 
of which the kindness and cordiality somewhat lessened her disturbance at the 
parting.
When Mrs Harrel's carriage arrived, Mrs Delvile took a most affectionate leave 
of her, and her son attended her to the coach.
In her way down stairs, he stopt her for a few moments, and in some confusion 
said "I wish much to apologize to Miss Beverley, before her departure, for the 
very gross mistake of which I have been guilty. I know not if it is possible 
she can pardon me, and I hardly know myself by what perversity and blindness I 
persisted so long in my error."
"O," cried Cecilia, much rejoiced at this voluntary explanation, "if you are 
but convinced you were really in an error, I have nothing more to wish. 
Appearances, indeed, were so strangely against me, that I ought not, perhaps, 
to wonder they deceived you."
"This is being candid indeed," answered he, again leading her on: "and in 
truth, though your anxiety was obvious, its cause was obscure, and where any 
thing is left to conjecture, opinion interferes, and the judgment is easily 
warped. My own partiality, however, for Mr Belfield, will I hope plead my 
excuse, as from that, and not from any prejudice against the Baronet, my 
mistake arose: on the contrary, so highly I respect your taste and your 
discernment, that your approbation, when known, can scarcely fail of securing 
mine."
Great as was the astonishment of Cecilia at the conclusion of this speech; she 
was at the coach door before she could make any answer: but Delvile, perceiving 
her surprise, added, while he handed her in, "Is it possible—but no, it is 
not possible I should be again mistaken. I forbore to speak at all, till I had 
information by which I could not be misled."
"I know not in what unaccountable obscurity," cried Cecilia, "I, or my affairs, 
may be involved, but I perceive that the cloud which I had hoped was 
dissipated, is thicker and more impenetrable than ever."
Delvile then bowed to her with a look that accused her of insincerity, and the 
carriage drove away.
Teazed by these eternal mistakes, and provoked to find that though the object 
of her supposed partiality was so frequently changed, the notion of her 
positive engagement with one of the duelists was invariable, she resolved with 
all the speed in her power, to commission Mr Monckton to wait upon Sir Robert 
Floyer, and in her own name give a formal rejection to his proposals, and 
desire him thenceforward to make known, by every opportunity, their total 
independence of each other: for sick of debating with Mr Harrel, and detesting 
all intercourse with Sir Robert, she now dropt her design of seeking an 
explanation herself.
She was received by Mrs Harrel with the same coldness with which she had parted 
from her. That lady appeared now to have some uneasiness upon her mind, and 
Cecilia endeavoured to draw from her its cause; but far from seeking any 
alleviation in friendship, she studiously avoided her, seeming pained by her 
conversation, and reproached by her sight. Cecilia perceived this encreasing 
reserve with much concern, but with more indignation, conscious that her good 
offices had merited a better reception, and angry to find that her advice had 
not merely failed of success, but even exposed her to aversion.
Mr Harrel, on the contrary, behaved to her with unusual civility, seemed eager 
to oblige her, and desirous to render his house more agreeable to her than 
ever. But in this he did not prosper; for Cecilia, immediately upon her return, 
looking in her apartment for the projected alterations, and finding none had 
been made, was so disgusted by such a detection of duplicity, that he sunk yet 
lower than before in her opinion, and she repined at the necessity she was 
under of any longer continuing his guest.
The joy of Mr Arnott at again seeing her, was visible and sincere; and not a 
little was it encreased by finding that Cecilia, who sought not more to avoid 
Mr Harrel and Sir Robert, than she was herself avoided by Mrs Harrel, talked 
with pleasure to nobody else in the house, and scarcely attempted to conceal 
that he was the only one of the family who possessed any portion of her esteem.
Even Sir Robert appeared now to have formed a design of paying her rather more 
respect than he had hitherto thought necessary; but the violence he did himself 
was so evident, and his imperious nature seemed so repugnant to the task, that 
his insolence, breaking forth by starts, and checked only by compulsion, was 
but the more conspicuous from his inadequate efforts to disguise it.






BOOK IV.

{Illustration}






