
The day following this happy intellectual arrangement, Cecilia was visited by 
Mr Monckton. That gentleman, who had enquired for her immediately after the 
Harrels went to their villa, and who had flattered himself with reaping much 
advantage from their absence, by frequent meetings and confidential discourses, 
suffered the severest mortification when he found that her stay in town 
rendered her not the less inaccessible to him, since he had no personal 
acquaintance with the Delviles, and could not venture to present himself at 
their house.
He was now received by her with more than usual pleasure; the time had seemed 
long to her since she had conversed with him, and she was eager to ask his 
counsel and assistance in her affairs. She related to him the motives which had 
induced her to go to St James'-square, and the incorrigible obstinacy with 
which Mr Harrel still continued to encourage the addresses of Sir Robert 
Floyer; she earnestly entreated him to become her agent in a business to which 
she was unequal, by expostulating in her cause with Mr Harrel, and by calling 
upon Sir Robert himself to insist upon his foregoing his unauthorised 
pretensions.
Mr Monckton listened eagerly to her account and request, and when she had 
finished, assured her he would deliberate upon each circumstance of the affair, 
and then maturely weigh every method he could devise, to extricate her from an 
embarrassment which now grew far too serious to be safely neglected.
"I will not, however," continued he, "either act or give my opinion without 
further enquiry, as I am confident there is a mystery in this business which 
lies deeper than we can at present fathom. Mr Harrel has doubtless purposes of 
his own to answer by this pretended zeal for Sir Robert; nor is it difficult to 
conjecture what they may be. Friendship, in a man of his light cast, is a mere 
cover, a mere name, to conceal a connection which has its basis solely in the 
licentious convenience of borrowing money, going to the same gaming house, and 
mutually communicating and boasting their mutual vices and intrigues, while, 
all the time, their regard for each other is equally hollow with their regard 
for truth and integrity."
He then cautioned her to be extremely careful with respect to any money 
transactions with Mr Harrel, whose splendid extravagance he assured her was 
universally known to exceed his fortune.
The countenance of Cecilia during this exhortation was testimony sufficient to 
the penetrating eyes of Mr Monckton that his advice came not too soon: a 
suspicion of the real state of the case speedily occurred to him, and he 
questioned her minutely upon the subject. She endeavoured to avoid making him 
any answer, but his discernment was too keen for her inartificial evasion, and 
he very soon gathered all the particulars of her transactions with Mr Harrel.
He was less alarmed at the sum she had lent him, which was rather within his 
expectations, than at the method she had been induced to take to procure it. He 
represented to her in the strongest manner the danger of imposition, nay of 
ruin, from the extortions and the craft of money-lenders; and he charged her 
upon no consideration to be tempted or persuaded again to have recourse to such 
perilous expedients.
She promised the most attentive observance of his advice: and then told him the 
acquaintance she had made with Miss Belfield, and her sorrow for the situation 
of her brother; though, satisfied for the present with the plan of young 
Delvile, she now gave up her design of soliciting his counsel.
In the midst of this conversation, a note was delivered to her from Mr Delvile 
senior, acquainting her with his return to town, and begging the favour of her 
to call in St James's-square the next morning, as he wished to speak to her 
upon some business of importance.
The eager manner in which Cecilia accepted this invitation, and her repeated 
and earnest exclamation of wonder at what Mr Delvile could have to say, past 
not unnoticed by Mr Monckton; he instantly turned the discourse from the 
Belfields, the Harrels, and the Baronet, to enquire how she had spent her time 
during her visit in St James's-square, and what was her opinion of the family 
after her late opportunities of intimacy?
Cecilia answered that she had yet seen nothing more of Mr Delvile, who had been 
absent the whole time, but with equal readiness and pleasure she replied to all 
his questions concerning his lady, expatiating with warmth and fervour upon her 
many rare and estimable qualities.
But when the same interrogatories were transferred to the son, she spoke no 
longer with the same ease, nor with her usual promptitude of sincerity; she was 
embarrassed, her answers were short, and she endeavoured to hasten from the 
subject.
Mr Monckton remarked this change with the most apprehensive quickness, but, 
forcing a smile, "Have you yet," he said, "observed the family compact in which 
those people are bound to besiege you, and draw you into their snares?"
"No, indeed," cried Cecilia, much hurt by the question, "I am sure no such 
compact has been formed; and I am sure, too, that if you knew them better, you 
would yourself be the first to admire and do them justice."
"My dear Miss Beverley," cried he, "I know them already; I do not, indeed, 
visit them, but I am perfectly acquainted with their characters, which have 
been drawn to me by those who are most closely connected with them, and who 
have had opportunities of inspection which I hope will never fall to your 
share, since I am satisfied the trial would pain, though the proof would 
convince you."
"What then have you heard of them?" cried Cecilia, with much earnestness: "It 
is, at least, not possible any ill can be said of Mrs Delvile."
"I beg your pardon," returned he. "Mrs Delvile is not nearer perfection than 
the rest of her family, she has only more art in disguising her foibles; 
because, tho' she is the daughter of pride, she is the slave of interest."
"I see you have been greatly misinformed," said Cecilia warmly; "Mrs Delvile is 
the noblest of women! she may, indeed, from her very exaltation, have enemies, 
but they are the enemies of envy, not of resentment, enemies raised by superior 
merit, not excited by injury or provocation!"
"You will know her better hereafter;" said Mr Monckton calmly, "I only hope 
your knowledge will not be purchased by the sacrifice of your happiness."
"And what knowledge of her, Sir," cried Cecilia, starting, "can have power to 
put my happiness in any danger?"
"I will tell you," answered he, "with all the openness you have a claim to from 
my regard, and then leave to time to shew if I am mistaken. The Delvile family, 
notwithstanding its ostentatious magnificence, I can solemnly assure you, is 
poor in every branch, alike lineal and collateral."
"But is it therefore the less estimable?"
"Yes, because the more rapacious. And while they count on each side Dukes, 
Earls and Barons in their genealogy, the very wealth with which, through your 
means, they project the support of their insolence, and which they will grasp 
with all the greediness of avarice, they will think honoured by being employed 
in their service, while the instrument, all amiable as she is, by which they 
attain it, will be constantly held down as the disgrace of their alliance."
Cecilia, stung to the soul by this speech, rose from her chair, unwilling to 
answer it, yet unable to conceal how much it shocked her. Mr Monckton, 
perceiving her emotion, followed her, and taking her hand, said, "I would not 
give this warning to one I thought too weak to profit from it; but as I am well 
informed of the use that is meant to be made of your fortune, and the abuse 
that will follow of yourself, I think it right to prepare you for their 
artifices, which merely to point out, may render abortive."
Cecilia, too much disturbed to thank him, drew back her hand, and continued 
silent. Mr Monckton, reading through her displeasure the state of her 
affections, saw with terror the greatness of the danger which threatened him. 
He found, however, that the present was no time for enforcing objections, and 
perceiving he had already gone too far, though he was by no means disposed to 
recant, he thought it most prudent to retreat, and let her meditate upon his 
exhortation while its impression was yet strong in her mind.
He would now, therefore, have taken leave; but Cecilia, endeavouring to 
recollect herself, and fully persuaded that however he had shocked her, he had 
only her interest in view, stopt him, saying, "You think me, perhaps, 
ungrateful, but believe me I am not; I must, however, acknowledge that your 
censure of Mrs Delvile hurts me extremely. Indeed I cannot doubt her 
worthiness, I must still, therefore, plead for her, and I hope the time may 
come when you will allow I have not pleaded unjustly."
"Justly or unjustly," answered Mr Monckton, "I am at least sure you can never 
plead vainly. I give up, therefore, to your opinion my attack of Mrs Delvile, 
and am willing from your commendations to suppose her the best of the race. 
Nay, I will even own that perhaps Mr Delvile himself, as well as his lady, 
might pass through life and give but little offence, had they only themselves 
to think of, and no son to stimulate their arrogance."
"Is the son, then," said Cecilia faintly, "so much the most culpable?"
"The son, I believe," answered he, "is at least the chief incentive to 
insolence and ostentation in the parents, since it is for his sake they covet 
with such avidity honours and riches, since they plume themselves upon 
regarding him as the support of their name and, family, and since their pride 
in him even surpasses their pride in their lineage and themselves."
"Ah!" thought Cecilia, "and of such a son who could help being proud!"
"Their purpose, therefore," he continued, "is to, secure through his means your 
fortune, which they will no sooner obtain, than, to my certain knowledge, they 
mean instantly, and most unmercifully, to employ it in repairing all their 
dilapidated estates."
And then he quitted the subject; and, with that guarded warmth which 
accompanied all his expressions, told her he would carefully watch for her 
honour and welfare, and, repeating his promise of endeavouring to discover the 
tie by which Mr Harrel seemed bound to the Baronet, he left her—a prey 
himself to an anxiety yet more severe than that with which he had filled her! 
He now saw all his long cherished hopes in danger of final destruction, and 
suddenly cast upon the brink of a precipice, where, while he struggled to 
protect them from falling, his eyes were dazzled by beholding them totter.
Mean while Cecilia, disturbed from the calm of soft serenity to which she had 
yielded every avenue of her soul, now looked forward with distrust and 
uneasiness, even to the completion of the views which but a few minutes before 
had comprised all her notions of felicity. The alliance which so lately had 
seemed wholly unexceptionable, now appeared teeming with objections, and 
threatening with difficulties. The representations of Mr Monckton had cruelly 
mortified her; well acquainted with his knowledge of the world, and wholly 
unsuspicious of his selfish motives, she gave to his assertions involuntary 
credit, and even while she attempted to combat them, they made upon her mind an 
impression scarce ever to be erased.
Full, therefore, of doubt and inquietude, she passed the night in discomfort 
and irresolution, now determining to give way to her feelings, and now to be 
wholly governed by the counsel of Mr Monckton.





