
Mean time young Delvile failed not to honour Cecilia's introduction of him to 
Mr Harrel, by waiting upon that gentleman as soon as the ill effects of his 
accident at the Pantheon permitted him to leave his own house. Mr Harrel, 
though just going out when he called, was desirous of being upon good terms 
with his family, and therefore took him up stairs to present him to his lady, 
and invited him to tea and cards the next evening.
Cecilia, who was with Mrs Harrel, did not see him without emotion; which was 
not much lessened by the task of thanking him for his assistance at the 
Pantheon, and enquiring how he had himself fared. No sign, however, of emotion 
appeared in return, either when he first addressed, or afterwards answered her: 
the look of solicitude with which she had been so much struck when they last 
parted was no longer discernible, and the voice of sensibility which had 
removed all her doubts, was no longer to be heard. His general ease, and 
natural gaiety were again unruffled, and though he had never seemed really 
indifferent to her, there was not the least appearance of any added partiality.
Cecilia felt an involuntary mortification as she observed this change: yet, 
upon reflection, she still attributed his whole behaviour to his mistake with 
respect to her situation, and therefore was but the more gratified by the 
preference he occasionally betrayed.
The invitation for the next evening was accepted, and Cecilia, for once, felt 
no repugnance to joining the company. Young Delvile again was in excellent 
spirits; but though his chief pleasure was evidently derived from conversing 
with her, she had the vexation to observe that he seemed to think her the 
undoubted property of the Baronet, always retreating when he approached, and as 
careful, when next her, to yield his place if he advanced, as, when he was 
distant, to guard it from all others.
But when Sir Robert was employed at cards, all scruples ceasing, he neglected 
not to engross her almost wholly. He was eager to speak to her of the affairs 
of Mr Belfield, which he told her wore now a better aspect. The letter, indeed, 
of recommendation which he had shewn to her, had failed, as the nobleman to 
whom it was written had already entered into an engagement for his son; but he 
had made application elsewhere which he believed would be successful, and he 
had communicated his proceedings to Mr Belfield, whose spirits he hoped would 
recover by this prospect of employment and advantage. "It is, however, but too 
true," he added, "that I have rather obtained his consent to the steps I am 
taking, than his approbation of them: nor do I believe, had I previously 
consulted him, I should have had even that. Disappointed in his higher views, 
his spirit is broken, and he is heartless and hopeless, scarce condescending to 
accept relief, from the bitter remembrance that he expected preferment. Time, 
however, will blunt this acute sensibility, and reflection will make him blush 
at this unreasonable delicacy. But we must patiently soothe him till he is more 
himself, or while we mean to serve, we shall only torment him. Sickness, 
sorrow, and poverty have all fallen heavily upon him, and they have all fallen 
at once: we must not, therefore, wonder to find him intractable, when his mind 
is as much depressed, as his body is enervated."
Cecilia, to whom his candour and generosity always gave fresh delight, 
strengthened his opinions by her concurrence, and confirmed his designs by the 
interest which she took in them.
From this time, he found almost daily some occasion for calling in 
Portman-square. The application of Cecilia in favour of Mr Belfield gave him a 
right to communicate to her all his proceedings concerning him; and he had some 
letter to shew, some new scheme to propose, some refusal to lament, or some 
hope to rejoice over, almost perpetually: or even when these failed, Cecilia 
had a cold, which he came to enquire after, or Mrs Harrel gave him an 
invitation, which rendered any excuse unnecessary. But though his intimacy with 
Cecilia was encreased, though his admiration of her was conspicuous, and his 
fondness for her society seemed to grow with the enjoyment of it, he yet never 
manifested any doubt of her engagement with the Baronet, nor betrayed either 
intention or desire to supplant him. Cecilia, however, repined not much at the 
mistake, since she thought it might be instrumental to procuring her a more 
impartial acquaintance with his character, than she could rationally expect, 
if, as she hoped, the explanation of his error should make him seek her good 
opinion with more study and design.
To satisfy herself not only concerning the brother but the sister, she again 
visited Miss Belfield, and had the pleasure of finding her in better spirits, 
and hearing that the noble friend of her brother, whom she had already 
mentioned, and whom Cecilia had before suspected to be young Delvile, had now 
pointed out to him a method of conduct by which his affairs might be decently 
retrieved, and himself creditably employed. Miss Belfield spoke of the plan 
with the highest satisfaction; yet she acknowledged that her mother was 
extremely discontented with it, and that her brother himself was rather led by 
shame than inclination to its adoption. Yet he was evidently easier in his 
mind, though far from happy, and already so much better, that Mr Rupil said he 
would very soon be able to leave his room.
Such was the quiet and contented situation of Cecilia, when one evening, which 
was destined for company at home, while she was alone in the drawing-room, 
which Mrs Harrel had just left to answer a note, Sir Robert Floyer accidentally 
came up stairs before the other gentlemen.
"Ha!" cried he, the moment he saw her, "at last have I the good fortune to meet 
with you alone! this, indeed, is a favour I thought I was always to be denied."
He was then approaching her; but Cecilia, who shrunk involuntarily at the sight 
of him, was retreating hastily to quit the room, when suddenly recollecting 
that no better opportunity might ever offer for a final explanation with him, 
she irresolutely stopt; and Sir Robert, immediately following, took her hand, 
and pressing it to his lips as she endeavoured to withdraw it, exclaimed, "You 
are a most charming creature!" when the door was opened, and young Delvile at 
the same moment was announced and appeared.
Cecilia, colouring violently, and extremely chagrined, hastily disengaged 
herself from his hold. Delvile seemed uncertain whether he ought not to retire, 
which Sir Robert perceiving, bowed to him with an air of mingled triumph and 
vexation, and said, "Sir your most obedient!"
The doubt, however, in which every one appeared of what was next to be done, 
was immediately removed by the return of Mrs Harrel, and the arrival at almost 
the same moment of more company.
The rest of the evening was spent, on the part of Cecilia, most painfully: the 
explanation she had planned had ended in worse than nothing, for by suffering 
the Baronet to detain her, she had rather shewn a disposition to oblige, than 
any intention to discard him; and the situation in which she had been surprised 
by young Delvile, was the last to clear the suspicions she so little wished him 
to harbour: while, on his part, the accident seemed to occasion no other 
alteration than that of rendering him more than usually assiduous to give way 
to Sir Robert whenever he approached her.
Nor was Sir Robert slack in taking advantage of this attention: he was highly 
in spirits, talked to her with more than common freedom, and wore the whole 
evening an air of exulting satisfaction.
Cecilia, provoked by this presumption, hurt by the behaviour of young Delvile, 
and mortified by the whole affair, determined to leave this mistake no longer 
in the power of accident, but to apply immediately to Mr Delvile senior, and 
desire him, as her guardian, to wait upon Sir Robert himself, and acquaint him 
that his perseverance in pursuing her was both useless and offensive: and by 
this method she hoped at once to disentangle herself for ever from the Baronet, 
and to discover more fully the sentiments of young Delvile: for the provocation 
she had just endured, robbed her of all patience for waiting the advice of Mr 
Monckton.





