
The following morning, therefore, Cecilia went early to St James's-square: and, 
after the usual ceremonies of messages and long waiting, she was shewn into an 
apartment where she found Mr Delvile and his son.
She rejoiced to see them together, and determined to make known to them both 
the purport of her visit: and therefore, after some apologies and a little 
hesitation, she told Mr Delvile, that encouraged by his offers of serving her, 
she had taken the liberty to call upon him with a view to entreat his 
assistance.
Young Delvile, immediately arising, would have quitted the room; but Cecilia, 
assuring him she rather desired what she had to say should be known than kept 
secret, begged that he would not disturb himself.
Delvile, pleased with this permission to hear her, and curious to know what 
would follow, very readily returned to his seat.
"I should by no means," she continued, "have thought of proclaiming even to the 
most intimate of my friends, the partiality which Sir Robert Floyer has been 
pleased to shew me, had he left to me the choice of publishing or concealing 
it: but, on the contrary, his own behaviour seems intended not merely to 
display it, but to insinuate that it meets with my approbation. Mr Harrel, 
also, urged by too much warmth of friendship, has encouraged this belief; nor, 
indeed, do I know at present where the mistake stops, nor what it is report has 
not scrupled to affirm. But I think I ought no longer to neglect it, and 
therefore I have presumed to solicit your advice in what manner I may most 
effectually contradict it."
The extreme surprise of young Delvile at this speech was not more evident than 
pleasant to Cecilia, to whom it accounted for all that had perplext her in his 
conduct, while it animated every expectation she wished to encourage.
"The behaviour of Mr Harrel," answered Mr Delvile, "has by no means been such 
as to lead me to forget that his father was the son of a steward of Mr Grant, 
who lived in the neighbourhood of my friend and relation the Duke of Derwent: 
nor can I sufficiently congratulate myself that I have always declined acting 
with him. The late Dean, indeed, never committed so strange an impropriety as 
that of nominating Mr Harrel and Mr Briggs coadjutors with Mr Delvile. The 
impropriety, however, though extremely offensive to me, has never obliterated 
from my mind the esteem I bore the Dean: nor can I possibly give a greater 
proof of it than the readiness I have always shewn to offer my counsel and 
instruction to his niece. Mr Harrel, therefore, ought certainly to have desired 
Sir Robert Floyer to acquaint me with his proposals before he gave to him any 
answer."
"Undoubtedly, Sir," said Cecilia, willing to shorten this parading harangue, 
"but as he neglected that intention, will you think me too impertinent should I 
entreat the favour of you to speak with Sir Robert yourself, and explain to him 
the total inefficacy of his pursuit, since my determination against him is 
unalterable?"
Here the conference was interrupted by the entrance of a servant who said 
something to Mr Delvile, which occasioned his apologizing to Cecilia for 
leaving her for a few moments, and ostentatiously assuring her that no 
business, however important, should prevent his thinking of her affairs, or 
detain him from returning to her as soon as possible.
The astonishment of young Delvile at the strength of her last expression kept 
him silent some time after his father left the room; and then, with a 
countenance that still marked his amazement, he said "Is it possible, Miss 
Beverley, that I should twice have been thus egregiously deceived? or rather, 
that the whole town, and even the most intimate of your friends, should so 
unaccountably have persisted in a mistake."
"For the town," answered Cecilia, "I know not how it can have had any concern 
in so small a matter; but for my intimate friends, I have too few to make it 
probable they should ever have been so strangely misinformed."
"Pardon me," cried he, "it was from one who ought to know, that I had myself 
the intelligence."
"I entreat you, then," said Cecilia, "to acquaint me who it was?"
"Mr Harrel himself; who communicated it to a lady in my hearing, and at a 
public place."
Cecilia cast up her eyes in wonder and indignation at a proof so 
incontrovertible of his falsehood, but made not any answer.
"Even yet," continued he, "I can scarcely feel undeceived; your engagement 
seemed so positive, your connection so irretrievable,—so,—so fixed, I 
mean.—"
He hesitated, a little embarrassed; but then suddenly exclaimed, "Yet whence, 
if to neither favourable, if indifferent alike to Sir Robert and to Belfield, 
whence that animated apprehension for their safety at the Opera-house? whence 
that never to be forgotten oh stop him! good God! will nobody stop him!—Words 
of anxiety so tender! and sounds that still vibrate in my ear!"
Cecilia, struck with amazement in her turn at the strength of his own 
expressions, blushed, and for a few minutes hesitated how to answer him: but 
then, to leave nothing that related to so disagreeable a report in any doubt, 
she resolved to tell him ingenuously the circumstances that had occasioned her 
alarm: and therefore, though with some pain to her modesty, she confessed her 
fears that she had herself provoked the affront, though her only view had been 
to discountenance Sir Robert, without meaning to shew any distinction to Mr 
Belfield.
Delvile, who seemed charmed with the candour of this explanation, said, when 
she had finished it, "You are then at liberty?—-Ah madam!—how many may rue 
so dangerous a discovery!"
"Could you think," said Cecilia, endeavouring to speak with her usual ease, 
"that Sir Robert Floyer would be found so irresistible?"
"Oh no!" cried he, "far otherwise; a thousand times I have wondered at his 
happiness; a thousand times, when I have looked at you, and listened to you, I 
have thought it impossible!—yet my authority seemed indisputable. And how was 
I to discredit what was not uttered as a conjecture, but asserted as a fact? 
asserted, too, by the guardian with whom you lived? and not hinted as a secret, 
but affirmed as a point settled?"
"Yet surely," said Cecilia, "you have heard me make use of expressions that 
could not but lead you to suppose there was some mistake, whatever might be the 
authority which had won your belief."
"No," answered he, "I never supposed any mistake, though sometimes I thought 
you repented your engagement. I concluded, indeed, you had been unwarily drawn 
in, and I have even, at times, been tempted to acknowledge my suspicions to 
you, state your independence, and exhort you—as a friend, exhort you—to use 
it with spirit, and, if you were shackled unwillingly, incautiously, or 
unworthily, to break the chains by which you were confined, and restore to 
yourself that freedom of choice upon the use of which all your happiness must 
ultimately depend. But I doubted if this were honourable to the Baronet,—and 
what, indeed, was my right to such a liberty? none that every man might not be 
proud of, a wish to do honour to myself, under the officious pretence of 
serving the most amiable of women."
"Mr Harrel," said Cecilia, "has been so strangely bigoted to his friend, that 
in his eagerness to manifest his regard for him, he seems to have forgotten 
every other consideration; he would not, else, have spread so widely a report 
that could so ill stand enquiry."
"If Sir Robert," returned he, "is himself deceived while he deceives others, 
who can forbear to pity him? for my own part, instead of repining that hitherto 
I have been mistaken, ought I not rather to bless an error that may have been 
my preservative from danger?"
Cecilia, distressed in what manner to support her part in the conversation, 
began now to wish the return of Mr Delvile; and, not knowing what else to say, 
she expressed her surprise at his long absence.
"It is not, indeed, well timed," said young Delvile, "just now,—at the moment 
when—" he stopt, and presently exclaiming "Oh dangerous interval!" he arose 
from his seat in manifest disorder.
Cecilia arose too, and hastily ringing the bell, said, "Mr Delvile I am sure is 
detained, and therefore I will order my chair, and call another time."
"Do I frighten you away?" said he, assuming an appearance more placid.
"No," answered she, "but I would not hasten Mr Delvile."
A servant then came, and said the chair was ready.
She would immediately have followed him, but young Delvile again speaking, she 
stopt a moment to hear him. "I fear," said he, with much hesitation, "I have 
strangely exposed myself—and that you cannot—but the extreme 
astonishment—" he stopt again in the utmost confusion, and then adding, "you 
will permit me to attend you to the chair," he handed her down stairs, and in 
quitting her, bowed without saying a word more.
Cecilia, who was almost wholly indifferent to every part of the explanation but 
that which had actually passed, was now in a state of felicity more delightful 
than any she had ever experienced. She had not a doubt remaining of her 
influence over the mind of young Delvile, and the surprise which had made him 
rather betray than express his regard, was infinitely more flattering and 
satisfactory to her than any formal or direct declaration. She had now 
convinced him she was disengaged, and in return, though without seeming to 
intend it, he had convinced her of the deep interest which he took in the 
discovery. His perturbation, the words which escaped him, and his evident 
struggle to say no more, were proofs just such as she wished to receive of his 
partial admiration, since while they satisfied her heart, they also soothed her 
pride, by shewing a diffidence of success which assured her that her own secret 
was still sacred, and that no weakness or inadvertency on her part had robbed 
her of the power of mingling dignity with the frankness with which she meant to 
receive his addresses. All, therefore, that now employed her care, was to keep 
off any indissoluble engagement till each should be better known to the other.
For this reserve, however, she had less immediate occasion than she expected; 
she saw no more of young Delvile that day; neither did he appear the next. The 
third she fully expected him,—but still he came not. And while she wondered 
at an absence so uncommon, she received a note from Lord Ernolf, to beg 
permission to wait upon her for two minutes, at any time she would appoint.
She readily sent word that she should be at home for the rest of the day, as 
she wished much for an opportunity of immediately finishing every affair but 
one, and setting her mind at liberty to think only of that which she desired 
should prosper.
Lord Ernolf was with her in half an hour. She found him sensible and well bred, 
extremely desirous to promote her alliance with his son, and apparently as much 
pleased with herself as with her fortune. He acquainted her that he had 
addressed himself to Mr Harrel long since, but had been informed that she was 
actually engaged to Sir Robert Floyer: he should, therefore, have forborn 
taking up any part of her time, had he not, on the preceding day, while on a 
visit at Mr Delvile's, been assured that Mr Harrel was mistaken, and that she 
had not yet declared for any body. He hoped, therefore, that she would allow 
his son the honour of waiting upon her, and permit him to talk with Mr Briggs, 
who he understood was her acting guardian, upon such matters as ought to be 
speedily adjusted.
Cecilia thanked him for the honour he intended her, and confirmed the truth of 
the account he had heard in St James'-square, but at the same time told him she 
must decline receiving any visits from his lordship's son, and entreated him to 
take no measure towards the promotion of an affair which never could succeed.
He seemed much concerned at her answer, and endeavoured for some time to soften 
her, but found her so steady, though civil in her refusal, that he was obliged, 
however unwillingly, to give up his attempt.
Cecilia, when he was gone, reflected with much vexation on the readiness of the 
Delviles to encourage his visit; she considered, however, that the intelligence 
he had heard might possibly be gathered in general conversation; but she blamed 
herself that she had not led to some enquiry what part of the family he had 
seen, and who was present when the information was given him.
Mean while she found that neither coldness, distance, nor aversion were 
sufficient to repress Sir Robert Floyer, who continued to persecute her with as 
much confidence of success as could have arisen from the utmost encouragement. 
She again, though with much difficulty, contrived to speak with Mr Harrel upon 
the subject, and openly accused him of spreading a report abroad, as well as 
countenancing an expectation at home, that had neither truth nor justice to 
support them.
Mr Harrel, with his usual levity and carelessness, laughed at the charge, but 
denied any belief in her displeasure, and affected to think she was merely 
playing the coquet, while Sir Robert was not the less her decided choice.
Provoked and wearied, Cecilia resolved no longer to depend upon any body but 
herself for the management of her own affairs, and therefore, to conclude the 
business without any possibility of further cavilling, she wrote the following 
note to Sir Robert herself.
To Sir Robert Floyer, Bart.
Miss BEVERLEY presents her compliments to Sir Robert Floyer, and as she has 
some reason to fear Mr Harrel did not explicitly acquaint him with her answer 
to the commission with which he was entrusted, she thinks it necessary, in 
order to obviate any possible misunderstanding, to take this method of 
returning him thanks for the honour of his good opinion, but of begging at the 
same time that he would not lose a moment upon her account, as her thanks are 
all she can now, or ever, offer in return.
Portman-square, May 11th, 1779.
To this note Cecilia received no answer: but she had the pleasure to observe 
that Sir Robert forbore his usual visit on the day she sent it, and, though he 
appeared again the day following, he never spoke to her and seemed sullen and 
out of humour.
Yet still young Delvile came not, and still, as her surprise encreased, her 
tranquillity was diminished. She could form no excuse for his delay, nor 
conjecture any reason for his absence. Every motive seemed to favour his 
seeking, and not one his shunning her: the explanation which had so lately 
passed had informed him he had no rival to fear, and the manner in which he had 
heard it assured her the information was not indifferent to him; why, then, so 
assiduous in his visits when he thought her engaged, and so slack in all 
attendance when he knew she was at liberty?

CECILIA

or

MEMOIRS OF AN HEIRESS

VOLUME II (of III)


By Frances Burney










BOOK IV. Continued.






