
Cecilia was informed the next morning that a young woman begged to speak with 
her, and upon sending for her up stairs, she saw, to her great surprise, Miss 
Belfield.
She came in fear and trembling, sent, she said, by her mother, to entreat her 
pardon for what had passed the preceding day; "But I know, madam," she added, 
"you cannot pardon it, and therefore all that I mean to do is to clear my 
brother from any share in what was said, for indeed he has too much sense to 
harbour any such presumption; and to thank you with a most grateful heart for 
all the goodness you have shewn us."
And then, modestly courtsying, she would have returned home; but Cecilia, much 
touched by her gentleness, took her hand, and kindly reviving her by assurances 
of esteem, entreated that she would lengthen her stay.
"How good is this, madam," said she, "after having so much reason to think so 
ill of me and of all of us I tried all in my power to undeceive my mother, or 
at least to keep her quiet; but she was so much persuaded she was right, that 
she never would listen to me, and always said, did I suppose it was for me you 
condescended to come so often?"
"Yes," answered Cecilia, "most undoubtedly; had I not known you, however well I 
might have wished your brother, I should certainly not have visited at his 
house. But I am very happy to hear the mistake had spread no further."
"No indeed, madam, I never once thought of it; and as to my brother, when my 
mother only hinted it to him, he was quite angry. But though I don't mean to 
vindicate what has happened, you will not, I hope, be displeased if I say my 
mother is much more pardonable than she seems to be, for the same mistake she 
made with you, she would have been as apt to have made with a princess; it was 
not, therefore, from any want of respect, but merely from thinking my brother 
might marry as high as he pleased, and believing no lady would refuse him, if 
he would but have the courage to speak."
Cecilia assured her she would think no more of the error, but told her that to 
avoid its renewal, she must decline calling upon her again till her brother was 
gone. She begged therefore to see her in Portman-square whenever she had 
leisure, repeatedly assuring her of her good opinion and regard, and of the 
pleasure with which she should seize every opportunity of skewing them.
Delighted by a reception so kind, Miss Belfield remained with her all the 
morning; and when at last she was obliged to leave her, she was but too happy 
in being solicited to repeat her visit.
She suffered one day only to elapse before she skewed her readiness to accept 
the friendship that was offered her; and Cecilia, much pleased by this 
eagerness, redoubled her efforts to oblige and to serve her.
From this time, hardly a day passed in which she did not call in 
Postman-square, where nothing in her reception was omitted that could 
contribute to her contentment. Cecilia was glad to employ her mind in any way 
that related not to Delvile, whom she now earnestly endeavoured to think of no 
more, denying herself even the pleasure of talking of him with Miss Belfield, 
by the name of her brother's noble friend.
During this time she devised various methods, all too delicate to give even the 
shadow of offence, for making both useful and ornamental presents to her new 
favourite, with whom she grew daily more satisfied, and to whom she purposed 
hereafter offering a residence in her own house.
The trial of intimacy, so difficult to the ablest to stand, and from which even 
the most' faultless are so rarely acquitted, Miss Belfield sustained with 
honour. Cecilia found her artless, ingenuous, and affectionate; her 
understanding was good, though no pains had been taken to improve it; her 
disposition though ardent was soft, and her mind seemed informed by intuitive 
integrity.
She communicated to Cecilia all the affairs of her family, disguising from her 
neither distress nor meanness, and seeking to palliate nothing but the grosser 
parts of the character of her mother. She seemed equally ready to make known to 
her even the most chosen secrets of her own bosom, for that such she had was 
evident, from a frequent appearance of absence and uneasiness which she took 
but little trouble to conceal. Cecilia, however, trusted not herself, in the 
present critical situation of her own mind, with any enquiries that might lead 
to a subject she was conscious she ought not to dwell upon: a short time, she 
hoped, would totally remove her suspence; but as she had much less reason to 
expect good than evil, she made it her immediate study to prepare for the 
worst, and therefore carefully avoided all discourse that by nourishing her 
tenderness, might weaken her resolution.
While thus, in friendly conversation and virtuous forbearance, passed gravely, 
but not unhappily, the time of Cecilia, the rest of the house was very 
differently employed: feasting, revelling, amusements of all sorts were pursued 
with more eagerness than ever, and the alarm which so lately threatened their 
destruction, seemed now merely to heighten the avidity with which they were 
sought. Yet never was the disunion of happiness and diversion more striking and 
obvious; Mr Harrel, in spite of his natural levity, was seized from time to 
time with fits of horror that embittered his gayest moments, and cast a cloud 
upon all his enjoyments. Always an enemy to solitude, he now found it wholly 
insupportable, and ran into company of any sort, less from a hope of finding 
entertainment, than from a dread of spending half an hour by himself.
Cecilia, who saw that his rapacity for pleasure encreased with his uneasiness, 
once more ventured to speak with his lady upon the subject of reformation; 
counselling her to take advantage of his present apparent discontent, which 
showed at least some sensibility of his situation, in order to point out to him 
the necessity of an immediate inspection into his affairs, which, with a total 
change in his way of life, was her only chance for snatching him from the 
dismal despondency into which he was sinking.
Mrs Harrel declared herself unequal to following this advice, and said that her 
whole study was to find Mr Harrel amusement, for he was grown so ill-humoured 
and petulant she quite feared being alone with him.
The house therefore now was more crowded than ever, and nothing but dissipation 
was thought of. Among those who upon this plan were courted to it, the foremost 
was Mr Morrice, who, from a peculiar talent of uniting servility of conduct 
with gaiety of speech, made himself at once so agreeable and useful in the 
family, that in a short time they fancied it impossible to live without him. 
And Morrice, though his first view in obtaining admittance had been the 
cultivation of his acquaintance with Cecilia, was perfectly satisfied with the 
turn that matters had taken, since his utmost vanity had never led him to 
entertain any matrimonial hopes with her, and he thought his fortune as likely 
to profit from the civility of her friends as of herself. For Morrice, however 
flighty, and wild, had always at heart the study of his own interest; and 
though from a giddy forwardness of disposition he often gave offence, his 
meaning and his serious attention was not the less directed to the advancement 
of his own affairs: he formed no connection from which he hoped not some 
benefit, and he considered the acquaintance and friendship of his superiors in 
no other light than that of procuring him sooner or later recommendations to 
new clients.
Sir Robert Floyer also was more frequent than ever in his visits, and Mr 
Harrel, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Cecilia, contrived every possible 
opportunity of giving him access to her. Mrs Harrel herself, though hitherto 
neutral, now pleaded his cause with earnestness; and Mr Arnott, who had been 
her former refuge from this persecution, grew so serious and so tender in his 
devoirs, that unable any longer to doubt the sentiments she had inspired, she 
was compelled even with him to be guarded and distant.
She now with daily concern looked back to the sacrifice she had made to the 
worthless and ungrateful Mr Harrel, and was sometimes tempted to immediately 
chuse another guardian, and leave his house for ever: yet the delicacy of her 
disposition was averse to any step that might publicly expose him, and her 
early regard for his wife would not suffer her to put it in execution.
These circumstances contributed strongly to encrease her intimacy with Miss 
Belfield; she now never saw Mrs Delvile, whom alone she preferred to her, and 
from the troublesome assiduity of Sir Robert, scarce ever met Mr Monckton but 
in his presence: she found, therefore, no resource against teazing and 
vexation, but what was afforded her by the conversation of the amiable 
Henrietta.





