
A fortnight had now elapsed in which Cecilia had had no sort of communication 
with the Delviles, whom equally from pride and from prudence she forbore to 
seek for herself, when one morning, while she was sitting with Miss Belfield, 
her maid told her that young Mr Delvile was in the drawing-room, and begged the 
honour of seeing her for a few moments.
Cecilia, though she started and changed colour with surprize at this message, 
was unconscious she did either, from the yet greater surprise she received by 
the behaviour of Miss Belfield, who hastily arising, exclaimed "Good God, Mr 
Delvile!—do you know Mr Delvile, madam?—does Mr Delvile visit at this 
house?"
"Sometimes; not often," answered Cecilia; "but why?"
"I don't know,—nothing, madam,—I only asked by accident, I believe,—but 
it's very—it's extremely—I did not know"—and colouring violently, she 
again sat down.
An apprehension the most painful now took possession of Cecilia, and absorbed 
in thought, she continued for some minutes silent and immoveable.
From this state she was awakened by her maid, who asked if she chose to have 
her gloves.
Cecilia, taking them from her without speaking, left the room, and not daring 
to stop for enquiry or consideration, hastened down stairs; but when she 
entered the apartment where young Delvile was waiting for her, all utterance 
seemed denied her, and she courtsied without saying a word.
Struck with the look and uncommon manner of her entrance, he became in a moment 
as much disturbed as herself, pouring forth a thousand unnecessary and 
embarrassed apologies for his visit, and so totally forgetting even the reason 
why he made it, that he had taken his leave and was departing before he 
recollected it. He then turned back, forcing a laugh at his own absence of 
mind, and told her he had only called to acquaint her, that the commands with 
which she had honoured him were now obeyed, and, he hoped, to her satisfaction.
Cecilia, who knew not she had ever given him any, waited his further 
explanation; and he then informed her he had that very morning introduced Mr 
Belfield to the Earl of Vannelt, who had already heard him very advantageously 
spoken of by some gentlemen to whom he had been known at the University, and 
who was so much pleased with him upon this first interview, that he meant, 
after a few enquiries, which could not but turn out to his credit, to commit 
his eldest son to his trust in making the tour of Europe.
Cecilia thanked him for her share in the trouble he had taken in this 
transaction; and then asked if Mrs Delvile continued well.
"Yes," answered he, with a smile half reproachful, "as well as one who having 
ever hoped your favour, can easily be after finding that hope disappointed. But 
much as she has taught her son, there is one lesson she might perhaps learn 
from him;—to fly, not seek, those dangerous indulgences of which the 
deprivation is the loss of peace!"
He then bowed, and made his exit.
This unexpected reproof, and the yet more unexpected compliment that 
accompanied it, in both which more seemed meant than met the ear, encreased the 
perturbation into which Cecilia had already been thrown. It occurred to her 
that under the sanction of his mother's name, he had taken an opportunity of 
making an apology for his own conduct; yet why avoiding her society, if to that 
he alluded, should be flying a dangerous indulgence, she could not understand, 
since he had so little reason to fear any repulse in continuing to seek it.
Sorry, however, for the abrupt manner in which she had left Miss Belfield, she 
lost not a moment in hastening back to her; but when she came into the room, 
she found her employed in looking out of the window, her eye following some 
object with such earnestness of attention, that she perceived not her return.
Cecilia, who could not doubt the motive of her curiosity, had no great 
difficulty in forbearing to offer her any interruption. She drew her head back 
in a few minutes, and casting it upwards, with her hands clasped, softly 
whispered, "Heaven ever shield and bless him! and O may he never feel such pain 
as I do!"
She then again looked out, but soon drawing herself in, said, in the same soft 
accents, "Oh why art thou gone! sweetest and noblest of men! why might I not 
see thee longer, when, under heaven, there is no other blessing I wish for!"
A sigh which at these words escaped Cecilia made her start and turn towards the 
door; the deepest blushes overspread the cheeks of both as their eyes met each 
other, and while Miss Belfield trembled in every limb at the discovery she had 
made, Cecilia herself was hardly able to stand.
A painful and most embarrassed silence succeeded, which was only broken by Miss 
Belfield's bursting into tears.
Cecilia, extremely moved, forgot for a moment her own interest in what was 
passing, and tenderly approaching, embraced her with the utmost kindness: but 
still she spoke not, fearing to make an enquiry, from dreading to hear any 
explanation.
Miss Belfield, soothed by her softness, clung about her, and hiding her face in 
her arms, sobbed out, "Ah madam! who ought to be unhappy if befriended by you! 
if I could help it, I would love nobody else in almost the whole world. But you 
must let me leave you now, and to-morrow I will tell you every thing."
Cecilia, who had no wish for making any opposition, embraced her again, and 
suffered her quietly to depart.
Her own mind was now in a state of the utmost confusion. The rectitude of her 
heart and the soundness of her judgment had hitherto guarded her both from 
error and blame, and, except during her recent suspence, had preserved her 
tranquility inviolate: but her commerce with the world had been small and 
confined, and her actions had had little reference but to herself. The case was 
now altered; and she was suddenly in a conjuncture of all others the most 
delicate, that of accidentally discovering a rival in a favourite friend.
The fondness she had conceived for Miss Belfield, and the sincerity of her 
intentions as well as promises to serve her, made the detection of this secret 
peculiarly cruel: she had lately felt no pleasure but in her society, and 
looked forward to much future comfort from the continuance of her regard, and 
from their constantly living together: but now this was no longer even to be 
desired, since the utter annihilation of the wishes of both, by young Delvile's 
being disposed of to a third person, could alone render eligible their dwelling 
under the same roof.
Her pity, however, for Miss Belfield was almost wholly unallayed by jealousy; 
she harboured not any suspicion that she was loved by young Delvile, whose 
aspiring spirit led her infinitely more to fear some higher rival, than to 
believe he bestowed even a thought upon the poor Henrietta: but still she 
wished with the utmost ardour to know the length of their acquaintance, how 
often they had met, when they had conversed, what notice he had taken of her, 
and how so dangerous a preference had invaded her heart.
But though this curiosity was both natural and powerful, her principal concern 
was the arrangement of her own conduct: the next day Miss Belfield was to tell 
her every thing by a voluntary promise; but she doubted if she had any right to 
accept such a confidence. Miss Belfield, she was sure, knew not she was 
interested in the tale, since she had not even imagined that Delvile was known 
to her. She might hope, therefore, not only for advice but assistance, and 
fancy that while she reposed her secret in the bosom of a friend, she secured 
herself her best offices and best wishes for ever.
Would she obtain them? no; the most romantic generosity would revolt from such 
a demand, for however precarious was her own chance with young Delvile, Miss 
Belfield she was sure could not have any: neither her birth nor education 
fitted her for his rank in life, and even were both unexceptionable, the 
smallness of her fortune, as Mr Monckton had instructed her, would be an 
obstacle insurmountable.
Would it not be a kind of treachery to gather from her every thing, yet aid her 
in nothing? to take advantage of her unsuspicious openness in order to learn 
all that related to one whom she yet hoped would belong ultimately to herself, 
and gratify an interested curiosity at the expence of a candour not more simple 
than amiable? "No," cried Cecilia, "arts that I could never forgive, I never 
will practice; this sweet, but unhappy girl shall tell me nothing: betrayed 
already by the tenderness of her own heart, she shall at least suffer no 
further from any duplicity in mine. If, indeed, Mr Delvile, as I suspect, is 
engaged elsewhere, I will make this gentle Henrietta the object of my future 
solicitude: the sympathy of our situations will not then divide but unite us, 
and I will take her to my bosom, hear all her sorrows, and calm her troubled 
spirit by participating in her sensibility. But if, on the contrary, this 
mystery ends more happily for myself, if Mr Delvile has now no other 
engagement, and hereafter clears his conduct to my satisfaction, I will not be 
accessory to loading her future recollection with the shame of a confidence she 
then cannot but repent, nor with an injury to her delicacy that may wound it 
for ever."
She determined, therefore, carefully to avoid the subject for the present, 
since she could offer no advice for which she might not, hereafter, be 
suspected of selfish motives; but yet, from a real regard to the tender-hearted 
girl, to give all the tacit discouragement that was in her power, to a passion 
which she firmly believed would be productive of nothing but misery.
Once, from the frankness natural to her disposition, she thought not merely of 
receiving but returning her confidence: her better judgment, however, soon led 
her from so hazardous a plan, which could only have exposed them both to a 
romantic humiliation, by which, in the end, their mutual expectations might 
prove sources of mutual distrust.
When Miss Belfield, therefore, the next morning, her air unusually timid, and 
her whole face covered with blushes, made her visit, Cecilia, not seeming to 
notice her confusion, told her she was very sorry she was obliged to go out 
herself, and contrived, under various pretences, to keep her maid in the room. 
Miss Belfield, supposing this to be accidental, rejoiced in her imaginary 
reprieve, and soon recovered her usual chearfulness: and Cecilia, who really 
meant to call upon Mrs Delvile, borrowed Mrs Harrel's carriage, and set down 
her artless young friend at her new lodgings in Portland-street, before she 
proceeded to St James's-square, talking the whole time upon matters of utter 
indifference.





