
The next morning opened with another scene; Mrs Harrel ran into Cecilia's room 
before breakfast, and acquainted her that Mr Harrel had not been at home all 
night.
The consternation with which she heard this account she instantly endeavoured 
to dissipate, in order to soften the apprehension with which it was 
communicated: Mrs Harrel, however, was extremely uneasy, and sent all the town 
over to make enquiries, but without receiving any intelligence.
Cecilia, unwilling to leave her in a state of such alarm, wrote an excuse to 
Mrs Delvile, that she might continue with her till some information was 
procured. A subject also of such immediate concern, was sufficient apology for 
avoiding any particular conversation with Miss Belfield, who called, as usual, 
about noon, and whose susceptible heart was much affected by the evident 
disturbance in which she found Cecilia.
The whole day passed, and no news arrived: but, greatly to her astonishment, 
Mrs Harrel in the evening prepared for going to an assembly! yet declaring at 
the same time it was extremely disagreeable to her, only she was afraid, if she 
stayed away, every body would suppose something was the matter.
Who then at last, thought Cecilia, are half so much the slaves of the world as 
the gay and the dissipated? Those who work for hire, have at least their hours 
of rest, those who labour for subsistence are at liberty when subsistence is 
procured; but those who toil to please the vain and the idle, undertake a task 
which can never be finished, however scrupulously all private peace, and all 
internal comfort, may be sacrificed in reality to the folly of saving 
appearances!
Losing, however, the motive for which she had given up her own engagement, she 
now sent for her chair, in order to spend an hour or two with Mrs Delvile. The 
servants, as they conducted her up stairs, said they would call their lady; and 
in entering the drawing-room she saw, reading and alone, young Delvile.
He seemed much surprised, but received her with the utmost respect, apologizing 
for the absence of his mother, whom he said had understood she was not to see 
her till the next day, and had left him to write letters now, that she might 
then be at liberty.
Cecilia in return made excuses for her seeming inconsistency; after which, for 
some time, all conversation dropt.
The silence was at length broken by young Delvile's saying "Mr Belfield's merit 
has not been thrown away upon Lord Vannelt; he has heard an excellent character 
of him from all his former acquaintance, and is now fitting up an apartment for 
him in his own house till his son begins his tour."
Cecilia said she was very happy in hearing such intelligence; and then again 
they were both silent.
"You have seen," said young Delvile, after this second pause, "Mr Belfield's 
sister?"
Cecilia, not without changing colour, answered "Yes, Sir."
"She is very amiable," he continued, "too amiable, indeed, for her situation, 
since her relations, her brother alone excepted, are all utterly unworthy of 
her."
He stopt; but Cecilia made no answer, and he presently added "Perhaps you do 
not think her amiable?—you may have seen more of her, and know something to 
her disadvantage?"
"O no!" cried Cecilia, with a forced alacrity, "but only I was thinking 
that—did you say you knew all her relations?"
"No," he answered, "but when I have been with Mr Belfield, some of them have 
called upon him."
Again they were both silent; and then Cecilia, ashamed of her apparent 
backwardness to give praise, compelled herself to say, "Miss Belfield is indeed 
a very sweet girl, and I wish—" she stopt, not well knowing herself what she 
meant to add.
"I have been greatly pleased," said he, after waiting some time to hear if she 
would finish her speech, "by being informed of your goodness to her, and I 
think she seems equally to require and to deserve it. I doubt not you will 
extend it to her when she is deprived of her brother, for then will be the time 
that by doing her most service, it will reflect on yourself most honour."
Cecilia, confounded by this recommendation, faintly answered 
"Certainly,—whatever is in my power,—I shall be very glad—"
And just then Mrs Delvile made her appearance, and during the mutual apologies 
that followed, her son left the room. Cecilia, glad of any pretence to leave it 
also, insisted upon giving no interruption to Mrs Delvile's letter writing, and 
having promised to spend all the next day with her, hurried back to her chair.
The reflections that followed her thither were by no means the most soothing: 
she began now to apprehend that the pity she had bestowed upon Miss Belfield, 
Miss Belfield in a short time might bestow upon her: at any other time, his 
recommendation would merely have served to confirm her opinion of his 
benevolence, but in her present state of anxiety and uncertainty, every thing 
gave birth to conjecture, and had power to alarm her. He had behaved to her of 
late with the strangest coldness and distance,—his praise of Henrietta had 
been ready and animated,—Henrietta she knew adored him, and she knew not with 
what reason,—but an involuntary suspicion arose in her mind, that the 
partiality she had herself once excited, was now transferred to that little 
dreaded, but not less dangerous rival.
Yet, if such was the case, what was to become either of the pride or the 
interest of his family? Would his relations ever pardon an alliance stimulated 
neither by rank nor riches? would Mr Delvile, who hardly ever spoke but to the 
high-born, without seeming to think his dignity somewhat injured, deign to 
receive for a daughter-in-law the child of a citizen and tradesman? would Mrs 
Delvile herself, little less elevated in her notions, though infinitely softer 
in her manners, ever condescend to acknowledge her? Cecilia's own birth and 
connections, superior as they were to those of Miss Belfield, were even openly 
disdained by Mr Delvile, and all her expectations of being received into his 
family were founded upon the largeness of her fortune, in favour of which the 
brevity of her genealogy might perhaps pass unnoticed. But what was the chance 
of Miss Belfield, who neither had ancestors to boast, nor wealth to allure?
This thought, however, awakened all the generosity of her soul; "If," cried 
she, "the advantages I possess are merely those of riches, how little should I 
be flattered by any appearance of preference! and how ill can I judge with what 
sincerity it may be offered! happier in that case is the lowly Henrietta, who 
to poverty may attribute neglect, but who can only be sought and caressed from 
motives of purest regard. She loves Mr Delvile, loves him with the most artless 
affection;—perhaps, too, he loves her in return,—why else his solicitude to 
know my opinion of her, and why so sudden his alarm when he thought it 
unfavourable? Perhaps he means to marry her, and to sacrifice to her innocence 
and her attractions all plans of ambition, and all views of 
aggrandizement:—thrice happy Henrietta, if such is thy prospect of felicity! 
to have inspired a passion so disinterested, may humble the most insolent of 
thy superiors, and teach even the wealthiest to envy thee!"





