
When Cecilia returned home, she heard with much concern that no tidings of Mr 
Harrel had yet been obtained. His lady, who did not stay out late, was now very 
seriously frightened, and entreated Cecilia to sit up with her till some news 
could be procured: she sent also for her brother, and they all three, in 
trembling expectation of what was to ensue, passed the whole night in watching.
At six o'clock in the morning, Mr Arnott besought his sister and Cecilia to 
take some rest, promising to go out himself to every place where Mr Harrel was 
known to resort, and not to return without bringing some account of him.
Mrs Harrel, whose feelings were not very acute, finding the persuasions of her 
brother were seconded by her own fatigue, consented to follow his advice, and 
desired him to begin his search immediately.
A few moments after he was gone, while Mrs Harrel and Cecilia were upon the 
stairs, they were startled by a violent knocking at the door: Cecilia, prepared 
for some calamity, hurried her friend back to the drawing-room, and then flying 
out of it again to enquire who entered, saw to her equal surprize and relief, 
Mr Harrel himself.
She ran back with the welcome information, and he instantly followed her: Mrs 
Harrel eagerly told him of her fright, and Cecilia expressed her pleasure at 
his return: but the satisfaction of neither was of long duration.
He came into the room with a look of fierceness the most terrifying, his hat 
on, and his arms folded. He made no answer to what they said, but pushed back 
the door with his foot, and flung himself upon a sofa.
Cecilia would now have withdrawn, but Mrs Harrel caught her hand to prevent 
her. They continued some minutes in this situation, and then Mr Harrel, 
suddenly rising, called-out "Have you any thing to pack up?"
"Pack up?" repeated Mrs Harrel, "Lord bless me, for what?"
"I am going abroad," he answered; "I shall set off to-morrow."
"Abroad?" cried she, bursting into tears, "I am sure I hope not!"
"Hope nothing!" returned he, in a voice of rage; and then, with a dreadful 
oath, he ordered her to leave him and pack up.
Mrs Harrel, wholly unused to such treatment, was frightened into violent 
hysterics; of which, however, he took no notice, but swearing at her for a fool 
who had been the cause of his ruin, he left the room.
Cecilia, though she instantly rang the bell, and hastened to her assistance, 
was so much shocked by this unexpected brutality, that she scarcely knew how to 
act, or what to order. Mrs Harrel, however, soon recovered, and Cecilia 
accompanied her to her own apartment, where she stayed, and endeavoured to 
sooth her till Mr Arnott returned.
The terrible state in which Mr Harrel had at last come home was immediately 
communicated to him, and his sister entreated him to use all his influence that 
the scheme for going abroad might be deferred, at least, if not wholly given up.
Fearfully he went on the embassy, but speedily, and with a look wholly 
dismayed, he returned. Mr Harrel, he said, told him that he had contracted a 
larger debt of honour than he had any means to raise, and as he could not 
appear till it was paid, he was obliged to quit the kingdom without delay.
"Oh brother!" cried Mrs Harrel, "and can you suffer us to go?"
"Alas, my dear sister," answered he, "what can I do to prevent it? and who, if 
I too am ruined, will in future help you?"
Mrs Harrel then wept bitterly, nor could the gentle Mr Arnott, forbear, while 
he tried to comfort her, mixing his own tears with those of his beloved sister; 
but Cecilia, whose reason was stronger, and whose justice was offended, felt 
other sensations: and leaving Mrs Harrel to the care of her brother, whose 
tenderness she infinitely compassionated, she retreated into her own room. Not, 
however, to rest; the dreadful situation of the family made her forget she 
wanted it, but to deliberate upon what course she ought herself to pursue.
She determined without any hesitation against accompanying them in their 
flight, as the irreparable injury she was convinced she had already done her 
fortune, was more than sufficient to satisfy the most romantic ideas of 
friendship and humanity: but her own place of abode must now immediately be 
changed, and her choice rested only between Mr Delvile and Mr Briggs.
Important as were the obstacles which opposed her residence at Mr Delvile's, 
all that belonged to inclination and to happiness encouraged it: while with 
respect to Mr Briggs, though the objections were lighter, there was not a 
single allurement. Yet whenever the suspicion recurred to her that Miss 
Belfield was beloved by young Delvile, she resolved at all events to avoid him; 
but when better hopes intervened, and represented that his enquiries were 
probably accidental, the wish of being finally acquainted with his sentiments, 
made nothing so desirable as an intercourse more frequent.
Such still was her irresolution, when she received a message from Mr Arnott to 
entreat the honour of seeing her. She immediately went down stairs, and found 
him in the utmost distress, "O Miss Beverley," he cried, "what can I do for my 
sister! what can I possibly devise to relieve her affliction!"
"Indeed I know not!" said Cecilia, "but the utter impracticability of preparing 
her for this blow, obviously as it has long been impending, makes it now fall 
so heavily I wish much to assist her,—but a debt so unjustifiably 
contracted—"
"O madam," interrupted he, "imagine not I sent to you with so treacherous a 
view as to involve you in our misery; far too unworthily has your generosity 
already been abused. I only wish to consult with you what I can do for my 
sister."
Cecilia, after some little consideration, proposed that Mrs Harrel should still 
be left in England, and under their joint care.
"Alas!" cried he, "I have already made that proposal, but Mr Harrel will not go 
without her, though his whole behaviour is so totally altered, that I fear to 
trust her with him."
"Who is there, then, that has more weight with him?" said Cecilia, "shall we 
send for Sir Robert Floyer to second our request?"
To this Mr Arnott assented, forgetting in his apprehension of losing his 
sister, the pain he should suffer from the interference of his rival.
The Baronet presently arrived, and Cecilia, not chusing to apply to him 
herself, left him with Mr Arnott, and waited for intelligence in the library.
In about an hour after, Mrs Harrel ran into the room, her tears dried up, and 
out of breath with joy, and called out "My dearest friend, my fate is now all 
in your hands, and I am sure you will not refuse to make me happy."
"What is it I can do for you?" cried Cecilia, dreading some impracticable 
proposal; "ask me not, I beseech you, what I cannot perform!"
"No, no," answered she, "What I ask requires nothing but good nature; Sir 
Robert Floyer has been begging Mr Harrel to leave me behind, and he has 
promised to comply, upon condition you will hasten your marriage, and take me 
into your own house."
"My marriage!" cried the astonished Cecilia.
Here they were joined by Mr Harrel himself, who repeated the same offer.
"You both amaze and shock me!" cried Cecilia, "what is it you mean, and why do 
you talk to me so wildly?"
"Miss Beverley," cried Mr Harrel, "it is high time now to give up this reserve, 
and trifle no longer with a gentleman so unexceptionable as Sir Robert Floyer. 
The whole town has long acknowledged him as your husband, and you are every 
where regarded as his bride, a little frankness, therefore, in accepting him, 
will not only bind him to you for ever, but do credit to the generosity of your 
character."
At that moment Sir Robert himself burst into the room, and seizing one of her 
hands, while both of them were uplifted in mute amazement, he pressed it to his 
lips, poured forth a volley of such compliments as he had never before 
prevailed with himself to utter, and confidently entreated her to complete his 
long-attended happiness without the cruelty of further delay.
Cecilia, almost petrified by the excess of her surprise, at an attack so 
violent, so bold, and apparently so sanguine, was for some time scarce able to 
speak or to defend herself; but when Sir Robert, presuming on her silence, said 
she had made him the happiest of men, she indignantly drew back her hand, and 
with a look of displeasure that required little explanation, would have walked 
out of the room: when Mr Harrel, in a tone of bitterness and disappointment, 
called out "Is this lady-like tyranny then never to end?" And Sir Robert, 
impatiently following her, said "And is my suspense to endure for ever? After 
so many months' attendance—"
"This, indeed, is something too much," said Cecilia, turning back, "You have 
been kept, Sir, in no suspense; the whole tenor of my conduct has uniformly 
declared the same disapprobation I at present avow, and which my letter, at 
least, must have put beyond all doubt."
"Harrel," exclaimed Sir Robert, "did not you tell me—"
"Pho, Pho," cried Harrel, "what signifies calling upon me? I never saw in Miss 
Beverley any disapprobation beyond what it is customary for young ladies of a 
sentimental turn to shew; and every body knows that where a gentleman is 
allowed to pay his devoirs for any length of time, no lady intends to use him 
very severely."
"And can you, Mr Harrel," said Cecilia, "after such conversations as have 
passed between us, persevere in this wilful misapprehension? But it is vain to 
debate where all reasoning is disregarded, or to make any protestations where 
even rejection is received as a favour."
And then, with an air of disdain, she insisted upon passing them, and went to 
her own room.
Mrs Harrel, however, still followed, and clinging round her, still supplicated 
her pity and compliance.
"What infatuation is this!" cried Cecilia, "is it possible that you, too, can 
suppose I ever mean to accept Sir Robert?"
"To be sure I do," answered she, "for Mr Harrel has told me a thousand times, 
that however you played the prude, you would be his at last."
Cecilia, though doubly irritated against Mr Harrel, was now appeased with his 
lady, whose mistake, however ill-founded, offered an excuse for her behaviour: 
but she assured her in the strongest terms that her repugnance to the Baronet 
was unalterable, yet told her she might claim from her every good office that 
was not wholly unreasonable.
These were words of slender comfort to Mrs Harrel, who well knew that her 
wishes and reason had but little affinity, and she soon, therefore, left the 
room.
Cecilia then resolved to go instantly to Mrs Delvile, acquaint her with the 
necessity of her removal, and make her decision whither, according to the 
manner in which her intelligence should be received.
She sent, therefore, to order a chair, and was already in the hall, when she 
was stopt by the entrance of Mr Monckton, who, addressing her with a look of 
haste and earnestness, said, "I will not ask whither you are going so early, or 
upon what errand, for I must beg a moment's audience, be your business what it 
may."
Cecilia then accompanied him to the deserted breakfast room, which none but the 
servants had this morning entered, and there, grasping her hand, he said, "Miss 
Beverley, you must fly this house directly! it is the region of disorder and 
licentiousness, and unfit to contain you."
She assured him she was that moment preparing to quit it, but begged he would 
explain himself.
"I have taken care," he answered, "for some time past, to be well informed of 
all the proceedings of Mr Harrel; and the intelligence I procured this morning 
is of the most alarming nature. I find he spent the night before the last 
entirely at a gaming table, where, intoxicated by a run of good luck, he passed 
the whole of the next day in rioting with his profligate intimates, and last 
night, returning again to his favourite amusement, he not only lost all he had 
gained, but much more than he could pay. Doubt not, therefore, but you will be 
called upon to assist him: he still considers you as his resource in times of 
danger, and while he knows you are under his roof, he will always believe 
himself secure."
"Every thing indeed conspires," said Cecilia, more shocked than surprised at 
this account, "to make it necessary I should quit his house: yet I do not think 
he has at present any further expectations from me, as he came into the room 
this morning not merely without speaking to me, but behaved with a brutality to 
Mrs Harrel that he must be certain would give me disgust. It shewed me, indeed, 
a new part of his character, for ill as I have long thought of him, I did not 
suspect he could be guilty of such unmanly cruelty."
"The character of a gamester," said Mr Monckton, "depends solely upon his luck; 
his disposition varies with every throw of the dice, and he is airy, gay and 
good humoured, or sour, morose and savage, neither from nature nor from 
principle, but wholly by the caprice of chance."
Cecilia then related to him the scene in which she had just been engaged with 
Sir Robert Floyer.
"This," cried he, "is a manoeuvre I have been some time expecting: but Mr 
Harrel, though artful and selfish, is by no means deep. The plan he had formed 
would have succeeded with some women, and he therefore concluded it would with 
all. So many of your sex have been subdued by perseverance, and so many have 
been conquered by boldness, that he supposed when he united two such powerful 
besiegers in the person of a Baronet, he should vanquish all obstacles. By 
assuring you that the world thought the marriage already settled, he hoped to 
surprise you into believing there was no help for it, and by the suddenness and 
vehemence of the attack, to frighten and hurry you into compliance. His own 
wife, he knew, might have been managed thus with ease, and so, probably, might 
his sister, and his mother, and his cousin, for in love matters, or what are so 
called, women in general are, readily duped. He discerned not the superiority 
of your understanding to tricks so shallow and impertinent, nor the firmness of 
your mind in maintaining its own independence. No doubt but he was amply to 
have been rewarded for his assistance, and probably had you this morning been 
propitious, the Baronet in return was to have cleared him from his present 
difficulty."
"Even in my own mind," said Cecilia, "I can no longer defend him, for he could 
never have been so eager to promote the interest of Sir Robert, in the present 
terrible situation of his own affairs, had he not been stimulated by some 
secret motives. His schemes and his artifices, however, will now be utterly 
lost upon me, since your warning and advice, aided by my own suffering 
experience of the inutility of all I can do for him, will effectually guard me 
from all his future attempts."
"Rest no security upon yourself," said Mr Monckton, "since you have no 
knowledge of the many tricks and inventions by which you may yet be plundered. 
Perhaps he may beg permission to reside in your house in Suffolk, or desire an 
annuity for his wife, or chuse to receive your first rents when you come of 
age; and whatever he may fix upon, his dagger and his bowl will not fail to 
procure him. A heart so liberal as yours can only be guarded by flight. You 
were going, you said, when I came,—and whither?"
"To—to St James's-square," answered she, with a deep blush.
"Indeed!—is young Delvile, then, going abroad?"
"Abroad?—no,—I believe not."
"Nay, I only imagined it from your chusing to reside in his house."
"I do not chuse it," cried Cecilia, with quickness, "but is not any thing 
preferable to dwelling with Mr Briggs?"
"Certainly," said Mr Monckton coolly, "nor should I have supposed he had any 
chance with you, had I not hitherto observed that your convenience has always 
been sacrificed to your sense of propriety."
Cecilia, touched by praise so full of censure, and earnest to vindicate her 
delicacy, after an internal struggle, which Mr Monckton was too subtle to 
interrupt, protested she would go instantly to Mr Briggs, and see if it were 
possible to be settled in his house, before she made any attempt to fix herself 
elsewhere.
"And when?" said Mr Monckton.
"I don't know," answered she, with some hesitation, "perhaps this afternoon."
"Why not this morning?"
"I can go out no where this morning; I must stay with Mrs Harrel."
"You thought otherwise when I came, you were then content to leave her."
Cecilia's alacrity, however, for changing her abode, was now at an end, and she 
would fain have been left quietly to re-consider her plans: but Mr Monckton 
urged so strongly the danger of her lengthened stay in the house of so 
designing a man as Mr Harrel, that he prevailed with her to quit it without 
delay, and had himself the satisfaction of handing her to her chair.





