
Mr Briggs was at home, and Cecilia instantly and briefly informed him that it 
was inconvenient for her to live any longer at Mr Harrel's, and that if she 
could be accommodated at his house, she should be glad to reside with him 
during the rest of her minority.
"Shall, shall," cried he, extremely pleased, "take you with all my heart. 
Warrant Master Harrel's made a good penny of you. Not a bit the better for 
dressing so fine; many a rogue in a gold lace hat."
Cecilia begged to know what apartments he could spare for her.
"Take you up stairs," cried he, "shew you a place for a queen."
He then led her up stairs, and took her to a room entirely dark, and so close 
for want of air that she could hardly breathe in it. She retreated to the 
landing-place till he had opened the shutters, and then saw an apartment the 
most forlorn she had ever beheld, containing no other furniture than a ragged 
stuff bed, two worn-out rush-bottomed chairs, an old wooden box, and a bit of 
broken glass which was fastened to the wall by two bent nails.
"See here, my little chick," cried he, "everything ready! and a box for your 
gimcracks into the bargain."
"You don't mean this place for me, Sir!" cried Cecilia, staring.
"Do, do;" cried he, "a deal nicer by and by. Only wants a little furbishing: 
soon put to rights. Never sweep a room out of use; only wears out brooms for 
nothing."
"But, Sir, can I not have an apartment on the first floor?"
"No, no, something else to do with it; belongs to the club; secrets in all 
things! Make this do well enough. Come again next week; wear quite a new face. 
Nothing wanting but a table; pick you up one at a broker's."
"But I am obliged, Sir, to leave Mr Harrel's house directly."
"Well, well, make shift without a table at first; no great matter if you ha'n't 
one at all, nothing particular to do with it. Want another blanket, though. 
Know where to get one; a very good broker hard by. Understand how to deal with 
him! A close dog, but warm."
"I have also two servants, Sir," said Cecilia.
"Won't have 'em! Sha'n't come! Eat me out of house and home."
"Whatever they eat, Sir," answered she, "will be wholly at my expence, as will 
everything else that belongs to them."
"Better get rid of them: hate servants; all a pack of rogues: think of nothing 
but stuffing and guzzling."
Then opening another door, "See here," he cried, "my own room just by; snug as 
a church!"
Cecilia, following him into it, lost a great part of her surprise at the praise 
he had lavished upon that which he destined for herself, by perceiving that his 
own was yet more scantily furnished, having nothing in it but a miserable bed 
without any curtains, and a large chest, which, while it contained his clothes, 
sufficed both for table and chair.
"What are doing here?" cried he angrily, to a maid who was making the bed, 
"can't you take more care? beat 'out all the feathers, see! two on the ground; 
nothing but waste and extravagance! never mind how soon a man's ruined. Come to 
want, you slut, see that, come to want!"
"I can never want more than I do here," said the girl, "so that's one comfort."
Cecilia now began to repent she had made known the purport of her visit, for 
she found it would be utterly impossible to accommodate either her mind or her 
person to a residence such as was here to be obtained and she only wished Mr 
Monckton had been present, that he might himself be convinced of the 
impracticability of his scheme. Her whole business, therefore, now, was to 
retract her offer, and escape from the house.
"I see, Sir," said she, when he turned from his servant, "that I cannot be 
received here without inconvenience, and therefore I will make some new 
arrangement in my plan."
"No, no," cried he, "like to have you, 'tis but fair, all in our turn; won't be 
chorused; Master Harrel's had his share. Sorry could not get you that 
sweetheart! would not bite; soon find out another; never fret."
"But there are so many things with which I cannot possibly dispense," said 
Cecilia, "that I am certain my removing hither would occasion you far more 
trouble than you at present foresee."
"No, no; get all in order soon: go about myself; know how to bid; understand 
trap; always go shabby; no making a bargain in a good coat. Look sharp at the 
goods; say they won't do; come away; send somebody else for 'em. Never go twice 
myself; nothing got cheap if one seems to have a hankering."
"But I am sure it is not possible," said Cecilia, hurrying down stairs, "that 
my room, and one for each of my servants, should be ready in time."
"Yes, yes," cried he, following her, "ready in a trice. Make a little shift at 
first; double the blanket till we get another; lie with the maid a night or 
two; never stand for a trifle."
And, when she was seated in her chair, the whole time disclaiming her intention 
of returning, he only pinched her cheek with a facetious smirk, and said, "By, 
by, little duck; come again soon. Warrant I'll have the room ready. Sha'n't 
half know it again; make it as smart as a carrot."
And then she left the house; fully satisfied that no one could blame her 
refusing to inhabit it, and much less chagrined than she was willing to suppose 
herself, in finding she had now no resource but in the Delviles.
Yet, in her serious reflections, she could not but think herself strangely 
unfortunate that the guardian with whom alone it seemed proper for her to 
reside, should by parsimony, vulgarity, and meanness, render riches 
contemptible, prosperity unavailing, and economy odious: and that the choice of 
her uncle should thus unhappily have fallen upon the lowest and most wretched 
of misers, in a city abounding with opulence, hospitality, and splendour, and 
of which the principal inhabitants, long eminent for their wealth and their 
probity, were now almost universally rising in elegance and liberality.





