
During the ride to town, not merely Cecilia, but Delvile himself attended 
wholly to Mrs Harrel, whose grief as it became less violent, was more easy to 
be soothed.
The distress of this eventful night was however not yet over; when they came to 
Portman-square, Delvile eagerly called to the coachman not to drive up to the 
house, and anxiously begged Cecilia and Mrs Harrel to sit still, while he went 
out himself to make some enquiries. They were surprised at the request, yet 
immediately consented; but before he had quitted them, Davison, who was 
watching their return, came up to them with information that an execution was 
then in the house.
Fresh misery was now opened for Mrs Harrel, and fresh horror and perplexity for 
Cecilia: she had no longer, however, the whole weight either of thought or of 
conduct upon herself: Delvile in her cares took the most animated interest, and 
beseeching her to wait a moment and appease her friend, he went himself into 
the house to learn the state of the affair.
He returned in a few minutes, and seemed in no haste to communicate what he had 
heard, but entreated them both to go immediately to St James's-square.
Cecilia felt extremely fearful of offending his father by the introduction of 
Mrs Harrel: yet she had nothing better to propose, and therefore, after a short 
and distressed argument, she complied.
Delvile then told her that the alarm of his mother, at which he had already 
hinted, proceeded from a rumour of this very misfortune, to which, though they 
knew not whether they might give credit, was owing the anxiety which at so late 
an hour, had induced him to go to Vauxhall in search of her. They gained 
admittance without any disturbance, as the servant of young Delvile had been 
ordered to sit up for his master. Cecilia much disliked thus taking possession 
of the house in the night-time, though Delvile, solicitous to relieve her, 
desired she would not waste a thought upon the subject, and making his servant 
shew her the room which had been prepared for her reception, he begged her to 
compose her spirits, and to comfort her friend, and promised to acquaint his 
father and mother when they arose with what had happened, that she might be 
saved all pain from surprise or curiosity when they met.
This service she thankfully accepted, for she dreaded, after the liberty she 
had taken, to encounter the pride of Mr Delvile without some previous apology, 
and she feared still more to see his lady without the same preparation, as her 
frequent breach of appointment might reasonably have offended her, and as her 
displeasure would affect her more deeply.
It was now near six o'clock, yet the hours seemed as long as they were 
melancholy till the family arose. They settled to remain quiet till some 
message was sent to them, but before any arrived, Mrs Harrel, who was seated 
upon the bed, wearied by fatigue and sorrow, cried herself to sleep like a 
child.
Cecilia rejoiced in seeing this reprieve from affliction, though her keener 
sensations unfitted her from partaking of it; much indeed was the uneasiness 
which kept her awake; the care of Mrs Harrel seemed to devolve upon herself, 
the reception she might meet from the Delviles was uncertain, and the horrible 
adventures of the night, refused for a moment to quit her remembrance.
At ten o'clock, a message was brought from Mrs Delvile, to know whether they 
were ready for breakfast. Mrs Harrel was still asleep, but Cecilia carried her 
own answer by hastening down stairs.
In her way she was met by young Delvile, whose air upon first approaching her 
spoke him again prepared to address her with the most distant gravity: but 
almost the moment he looked at her, he forgot his purpose; her paleness, the 
heaviness of her eyes, and the fatigue of long watching betrayed by her whole 
face, again, surprised him into all the tenderness of anxiety, and he enquired 
after her health not as a compliment of civility, but as a question in which 
his whole heart was most deeply interested.
Cecilia thanked him for his attention to her friend the night before, and then 
proceeded to his mother.
Mrs Delvile, coming forward to meet her, removed at once all her fears of 
displeasure, and banished all necessity of apology, by instantly embracing her, 
and warmly exclaiming "Charming Miss Beverley! how shall I ever tell you half 
the admiration with which I have heard of your conduct! The exertion of so much 
fortitude at a juncture when a weaker mind would have been overpowered by 
terror, and a heart less under the dominion of well-regulated principles, would 
have sought only its own relief by flying from distress and confusion, shews 
such propriety of mind as can only result from the union of good sense with 
virtue. You are indeed a noble creature! I thought so from the moment I beheld 
you; I shall think so, I hope, to the last that I live!"
Cecilia, penetrated with joy and gratitude, felt in that instant the amplest 
recompense for all that she had suffered, and for all that she had lost. Such 
praise from Mrs Delvile was alone sufficient to make her happy; but when she 
considered whence it sprung, and that the circumstances with which she was so 
much struck, must have been related to her by her son, her delight was 
augmented to an emotion the most pleasing she could experience, from seeing how 
high she was held in the esteem of those who were highest in her own.
Mrs Delvile then, with the utmost cordiality, began to talk of her affairs, 
saving her the pain of proposing the change of habitation that now seemed 
unavoidable, by an immediate invitation to her house, which she made with as 
much delicacy as if Mr Harrel's had still been open to her, and choice, not 
necessity, had directed her removal. The whole family, she told her, went into 
the country in two days, and she hoped that a new scene, with quietness and 
early hours, would restore both the bloom and sprightliness which her late 
cares and restlessness had injured. And though she very seriously lamented the 
rash action of Mr Harrel, she much rejoiced in the acquisition which her own 
house and happiness would receive from her society.
She next discussed the situation of her widowed friend, and Cecilia produced 
the packet which had been entrusted to her by her late husband. Mrs Delvile 
advised her to open it in the presence of Mr Arnott, and begged her to send for 
any other of her friends she might wish to see or consult, and to claim freely 
from herself whatever advice or assistance she could bestow.
And then, without waiting for Mr Delvile, she suffered her to swallow a hasty 
breakfast, and return to Mrs Harrel, whom she had desired the servants to 
attend, as she concluded that in her present situation she would not chuse to 
make her appearance.
Cecilia, lightened now from all her cares, more pleased than ever with Mrs 
Delvile, and enchanted that at last she was settled under her roof, went back 
with as much ability as inclination to give comfort to Mrs Harrel. She found 
her but just awaking, and scarce yet conscious where she was, or why not in her 
own house.
As her powers of recollection returned, she was soothed with the softest 
compassion by Cecilia, who in pursuance of Mrs Delvile's advice, sent her 
servant in search of Mr Arnott, and in consequence of her permission, wrote a 
note of invitation to Mr Monckton.
Mr Arnott, who was already in town, soon arrived: his own man, whom he had left 
to watch the motions of Mr Harrel, having early in the morning rode to the 
place of his retreat, with the melancholy tidings of the suicide and execution.
Cecilia instantly went down stairs to him. The meeting was extremely painful to 
them both. Mr Arnott severely blamed himself for his flight, believing it had 
hastened the fatal blow, which some further sacrifices might perhaps have 
eluded: and Cecilia half repented the advice she had given him, though the 
failure of her own efforts proved the situation of Mr Harrel too desperate for 
remedy.
He then made the tenderest enquiries about his sister, and entreated her to 
communicate to him the minutest particulars of the dreadful transaction: after 
which, she produced the packet, but neither of them had the courage to break 
the seal; and concluding the contents would be no less than his last will, they 
determined some third person should be present when they opened it. Cecilia 
wished much for Mr Monckton, but as his being immediately found was uncertain, 
and the packet might consist of orders which ought not to be delayed, she 
proposed, for the sake of expedition, to call in Mr Delvile.
Mr Arnott readily agreed, and she sent to beg a moment's audience with that 
gentleman.
She was desired to walk into the breakfast-room, where he was sitting with his 
lady and his son.
Not such was now her reception as when she entered that apartment before; Mr 
Delvile looked displeased and out of humour, and, making her a stiff bow, while 
his son brought her a chair, coldly said, "If you are hurried, Miss Beverley, I 
will attend you directly; if not, I will finish my breakfast, as I shall have 
but little time the rest of the morning, from the concourse of people upon 
business, who will crowd upon me till dinner, most of whom will be extremely 
distressed if I leave town without contriving to see them."
"There is not the least occasion, Sir," answered Cecilia, "that I should 
trouble you to quit the room I merely came to beg you would have the goodness 
to be present while Mr Arnott opens a small packet which was last night put 
into my hands by Mr Harrel."
"And has Mr Arnott," answered he, somewhat sternly, "thought proper to send me 
such a request?"
"No, Sir," said Cecilia, "the request is mine; and if, as I now fear, it is 
impertinent, I must entreat you to forget it."
"As far as relates merely to yourself," returned Mr Delvile, "it is another 
matter; but certainly Mr Arnott can have no possible claim upon my time or 
attention; and I think it rather extraordinary, that a young man with whom I 
have no sort of connection or commerce, and whose very name is almost unknown 
to me, should suppose a person in my style of life so little occupied as to be 
wholly at his command."
"He had no such idea, Sir," said Cecilia, greatly disconcerted; "the honour of 
your presence is merely solicited by myself, and simply from the apprehension 
that some directions may be contained in the papers which, perhaps, ought 
immediately to be executed."
"I am not, I repeat," said Mr Delvile, more mildly, "displeased at your part of 
this transaction; your want of experience and knowledge of the world makes you 
not at all aware of the consequences which may follow my compliance: the papers 
you speak of may perhaps be of great importance, and hereafter the first 
witness to their being read may be publickly called upon. You know not the 
trouble such an affair may occasion, but Mr Arnott ought to be better informed."
Cecilia, making another apology for the error which she had committed, was in 
no small confusion, quitting the room; but Mr Delvile, perfectly appeased by 
seeing her distress, stopt her, to say, with much graciousness, "For your sake, 
Miss Beverley, I am sorry I cannot act in this business; but you see how I am 
situated! overpowered with affairs of my own, and people who can do nothing 
without my orders. Besides, should there hereafter be any investigation into 
the matter, my name might, perhaps, be mentioned, and it would be superfluous 
to say how ill I should think it used by being brought into such company."
Cecilia then left the rooms secretly vowing that no possible exigence should in 
future tempt her to apply for assistance to Mr Delvile, which, however 
ostentatiously offered, was constantly withheld when claimed.
She was beginning to communicate to Mr Arnott her ill success, when young 
Delvile, with an air of eagerness, followed her into the room. "Pardon me," he 
cried, "for this intrusion,—but, tell me, is it impossible that in this 
affair I can represent my father? may not the office you meant for him, devolve 
upon me? remember how near we are to each other, and honour me for once with 
supposing us the same!"
Ah who, or what, thought Cecilia, can be so different? She thanked him, with 
much sweetness, for his offer, but declined accepting it, saying "I will not, 
now I know the inconveniencies of my request, be so selfish as even to suffer 
it should be granted."
"You must not deny me," cried he; "where is the packet? why should you lose a 
moment?"
"Rather ask," answered she, "why I should permit you to lose a moment in a 
matter that does not concern you? and to risk, perhaps, the loss of many 
moments hereafter, from a too incautious politeness."
"And what can I risk," cried he, "half so precious as your smallest 
satisfaction? do you suppose I can flatter myself with a possibility of 
contributing to it, and yet have the resolution to refuse myself so much 
pleasure? no, no, the heroic times are over, and self-denial is no longer in 
fashion!"
"You are very good," said Cecilia; "but indeed after what has passed—"
"No matter for what has passed," interrupted he, "we are now to think of what 
is to come. I know you too well to doubt your impatience in the execution of a 
commission which circumstances have rendered sacred; and should any thing 
either be done or omitted contrary to the directions in your packet, will you 
not be apt, blameless as you are, to disturb yourself with a thousand fears 
that you took not proper methods for the discharge of your trust?"
There was something in this earnestness so like his former behaviour, and so 
far removed from his late reserve, that Cecilia, who perceived it with a 
pleasure she could hardly disguise, now opposed him no longer, but took up the 
packet, and broke the seal.
And then, to her no small amazement, instead of the expected will, she found a 
roll of enormous bills, and a collection of letters from various creditors, 
threatening the utmost severity of the law if their demands were longer 
unanswered.
Upon a slip of paper which held these together, was written, in Mr Harrel's 
hand, To be all paid to-night with a BULLET.
Next appeared two letters of another sort; the first of which was from Sir 
Robert Floyer, and in these words:
Sir,—As all prospects are now over of the alliance, I hope you will excuse my 
reminding you of the affair at Brookes's of last Christmas. I have the honour 
to be, Sir, yours R. FLOYER.
The other was from Mr Marriot.
Sir,—Though I should think £2000 nothing for the smallest hope, I must take 
the liberty to say I think it a great deal for only ten minutes: you can't have 
forgot, Sir, the terms of our agreement, but as I find you cannot keep to them, 
I must beg to be off also on my side, and I am persuaded you are too much a man 
of honour to take advantage of my over-eagerness in parting with my money 
without better security. I am, Sir, your most humble servant, A. Marriot.
What a scene of fraud, double-dealing, and iniquity was here laid open! 
Cecilia, who at first meant to read every thing aloud, found the attempt 
utterly vain, for so much was she shocked, that she could hardly read on to 
herself.
Last of all appeared a paper in Mr Harrel's own hand-writing, containing these 
words.
For Mrs Harrel, Miss Beverley, and Mr Arnott.
I can struggle no longer, the last blow must now be struck! another day robs me 
of my house and my liberty, and blasts me by the fatal discovery of my double 
attempts.
This is what I have wished; wholly to be freed, or ruined past all resource, 
and driven to the long-projected remedy.
A burthen has my existence been these two years, gay as I have appeared; not a 
night have I gone to bed, but heated and inflamed from a gaming table; not a 
morning have I awaked, but to be soured with a dun!
I would not lead such a life again, if the slave who works hardest at the oar 
would change with me.
Had I a son, I would bequeath him a plough; I should then leave him happier 
than my parents left me.
Idleness has been my destruction; the want of something to do led me into all 
evil.
A good wife perhaps might have saved me,—mine, I thank her! tried not. 
Disengaged from me and my affairs, her own pleasures and amusements have 
occupied her solely. Dreadful will be the catastrophe she will see to-night; 
let her bring it home, and live better!
If any pity is felt for me, it will be where I have least deserved it! Mr 
Arnott—Miss Beverley! it will come from you!
To bring myself to this final resolution, hard, I confess, have been my 
conflicts: it is not that I have feared death, no, I have long wished it, for 
shame and dread have embittered my days; but something there is within me that 
causes a deeper horror, that asks my preparation for another world! that 
demands my authority for quitting this!—what may hereafter—O 
terrible!—Pray for me, generous Miss Beverley!—kind, gentle Mr Arnott, pray 
for me!—
Wretch as Mr Harrel appeared, without religion, principle, or honour, this 
incoherent letter, evidently written in the desperate moment of determined 
suicide, very much affected both Cecilia and Mr Arnott, and in spite either of 
abhorrence or resentment, they mutually shed tears over the address to 
themselves.
Delvile, to whom 'every part of the affair was new, could only consider these 
papers as so many specimens of guilt and infamy; he read them, therefore, with 
astonishment and detestation, and openly congratulated Cecilia upon having 
escaped the double snares that were spread for her.
While this was passing, Mr Monckton arrived; who felt but little satisfaction 
from beholding the lady of his heart in confidential discourse with two of his 
rivals, one of whom had long attacked her by the dangerous flattery of 
perseverance, and the other, without any attack, had an influence yet more 
powerful.
Delvile, having performed the office for which he came, concluded, upon the 
entrance of Mr Monckton, that Cecilia had nothing further to wish from him; for 
her long acquaintance with that gentleman, his being a married man, and her 
neighbour in the country, were circumstances well known to him: he merely, 
therefore, enquired if she would honour him with any commands, and upon her 
assuring him she had none, he quietly withdrew.
This was no little relief to Mr Monckton, into whose hands Cecilia then put the 
fatal packet: and while he was reading it, at the desire of Mr Arnott, she went 
up stairs to prepare Mrs Harrel for his admission.
Mrs Harrel, unused to solitude, and as eager for company when unhappy to 
console, as when easy to divert her, consented to receive him with pleasure: 
they both wept at the meeting, and Cecilia, after some words of general 
comfort, left them together.
She had then a very long and circumstantial conversation with Mr Monckton, who 
explained whatever had appeared dark in the writings left by Mr Harrel, and who 
came to her before he saw them, with full knowledge of what they contained.
Mr Harrel had contracted with Sir Robert Floyer a large debt of honour before 
the arrival in town of Cecilia; and having no power to discharge it, he 
promised that the prize he expected in his ward should fall to his share, upon 
condition that the debt was cancelled. Nothing was thought more easy than to 
arrange this business, for the Baronet was always to be in her way, and the 
report of the intended alliance was to keep off all other pretenders. Several 
times, however, her coldness made him think the matter hopeless; and when he 
received her letter, he would have given up the whole affair: but Mr Harrel, 
well knowing his inability to satisfy the claims that would follow such a 
defection, constantly persuaded him the reserve was affected, and that his own 
pride and want of assiduity occasioned all her discouragement.
But while thus, by amusing the Baronet with false hopes, he kept off his 
demands, those of others were not less clamorous: his debts increased, his 
power of paying them diminished; he grew sour and desperate, and in one night 
lost £3000 beyond what he could produce, or offer any security for.
This, as he said, was what he wished; and now he was, for the present, to 
extricate himself by doubling stakes and winning, or to force himself into 
suicide by doubling such a loss. For though, with tolerable ease, he could 
forget accounts innumerable with his tradesmen, one neglected debt of honour 
rendered his existence insupportable!
For this last great effort, his difficulty was to raise the £3000 already due, 
without which the proposal could not be made: and, after various artifices and 
attempts, he at length contrived a meeting with Mr Marriot, intreated him to 
lend him £2000 for only two days, and offered his warmest services in his 
favour with Cecilia.
The rash and impassioned young man, deceived by his accounts into believing 
that his ward was wholly at his disposal, readily advanced the money, without 
any other condition than that of leave to visit freely at his house, to the 
exclusion of Sir Robert Floyer. "The other £1000," continued Mr Monckton, "I 
know not how he obtained, but he certainly had three. You, I hope, were not so 
unguarded—"
"Ah, Mr Monckton," said Cecilia, "blame me not too severely! the attacks that 
were made,—the necessity of otherwise betraying the worthy and half ruined 
Mr. Arnott—"
"Oh fie," cried he, "to suffer your understanding to be lulled asleep, because 
the weak-minded Mr Arnott's could not be kept awake! I thought, after such 
cautions from me, and such experience of your own, you could not again have 
been thus duped."
"I thought so too," answered she, "but yet when the trial came on,—indeed you 
know not how I was persecuted."
"Yet you see," returned he, "the utter inutility of the attempt; you see, and I 
told you beforehand, that nothing could save him."
"True; but had I been firmer in refusal, I might not so well have known it; I 
might then have upbraided myself with supposing that my compliance would have 
rescued him."
"You have indeed," cried Mr Monckton, "fallen into most worthless hands, and 
the Dean was much to blame for naming so lightly a guardian to a fortune such 
as yours."
"Pardon me," cried Cecilia, "he never entrusted him with my fortune, he 
committed it wholly to Mr Briggs."
"But if he knew not the various subterfuges by which such a caution might be 
baffled, he ought to have taken advice of those who were better informed. Mr 
Briggs, too! what a wretch! mean, low, vulgar, sordid!—the whole city of 
London, I believe, could not produce such another! how unaccountable to make 
you the ward of a man whose house you cannot enter without disgust!"
"His house," cried Cecilia, "my uncle never wished me to enter; he believed, 
and he was right, that my fortune would be safe in his hands; but for myself, 
he concluded I should always reside at Mr Harrel's." "But does not the city at 
this time," said Mr Monckton, "abound in families where, while your fortune was 
in security, you might yourself have lived with propriety? Nothing requires 
circumspection so minute as the choice of a guardian to a girl of large 
fortune, and in general one thing only is attended to, an appearance of 
property. Morals, integrity, character, are either not thought of, or 
investigated so superficially, that the enquiry were as well wholly omitted." 
He then continued his relation.
Mr Harrel hastened with his £3000 to the gaming table; one throw of the dice 
settled the business, he lost, and ought immediately to have doubled the sum. 
That, however, was never more likely to be in his power; he knew it; he knew, 
too, the joint claims of Cecilia's deceived admirers, and that his house was 
again threatened with executions from various quarters:—he went home, loaded 
his pistols, and took the methods already related to work himself into courage 
for the deed.
The means by which Mr Monckton had procured these particulars were many and 
various, and not all such as he could avow: since in the course of his 
researches, he had tampered with servants and waiters, and scrupled at no 
methods that led but to discovery.
Nor did his intelligence stop here; he had often, he said, wondered at the 
patience of Mr Harrel's creditors, but now even that was cleared up by a fresh 
proof of infamy: he had been himself at the house in Portmansquare, where he 
was informed that Mr Harrel had kept them quiet, by repeated assurances that 
his ward, in a short time, meant to lend him money for discharging them all.
Cecilia saw now but too clearly the reason her stay in his house was so 
important to him; and wondered less at his vehemence upon that subject, though 
she detested it more.
"Oh how little," cried she, "are the gay and the dissipated to be known upon a 
short acquaintance! expensive, indeed, and thoughtless and luxurious he 
appeared to me immediately; but fraudulent, base, designing, capable of every 
pernicious art of treachery and duplicity,—such, indeed, I expected not to 
find him, his very flightiness and levity seemed incompatible with such 
hypocrisy."
"His flightiness," said Mr Monckton, "proceeded not from gaiety of heart, it 
was merely the effect of effort; and his spirits were as mechanical as his 
taste for diversion. He had not strong parts, nor were his vices the result of 
his passions; had oeconomy been as much in fashion as extravagance, he would 
have been equally eager to practice it; he was a mere time-server, he struggled 
but to be something, and having neither talents nor sentiment to know what, he 
looked around him for any pursuit, and seeing distinction was more easily 
attained in the road to ruin than in any other, he gallopped along it, 
thoughtless of being thrown when he came to the bottom, and sufficiently 
gratified in shewing his horsemanship by the way."
And now, all that he had either to hear or to communicate upon this subject 
being told, he enquired, with a face strongly expressive of his disapprobation, 
why he found her at Mr Delvile's, and what had become of her resolution to 
avoid his house?
Cecilia, who, in the hurry of her mind and her affairs, had wholly forgotten 
that such a resolution had been taken, blushed at the question, and could not, 
at first, recollect what had urged her to break it: but when he proceeded to 
mention Mr Briggs, she was no longer distressed; she gave a circumstantial 
account of her visit to him, related the mean misery in which he lived, and 
told him the impracticability of her residing in such a house.
Mr Monckton could now in decency make no further opposition, however painful 
and reluctant was his acquiescence: yet before he quitted her, he gave himself 
the consolation of considerably obliging her, and softened his chagrin by the 
sweetness of her acknowledgments.
He enquired how much money in all she had now taken up of the Jew; and hearing 
it was £9050, he represented to her the additional loss she must suffer by 
paying an exorbitant interest for so large a sum, and the almost certainty with 
which she might be assured of very gross imposition: he expatiated, also, upon 
the injury which her character might receive in the world, were it known that 
she used such methods to procure money, since the circumstances which had been 
her inducement would probably either be unnoticed or misrepresented: and when 
he had awakened in her much uneasiness and regret upon this subject, he offered 
to pay the Jew without delay, clear her wholly from his power, and quietly 
receive the money when she came of age from herself.
A proposal so truly friendly made her look upon the regard of Mr Monckton in a 
higher and nobler point of view than her utmost esteem and reverence had 
hitherto placed it: yet she declined at first accepting the offer, from an 
apprehension it might occasion him inconvenience; but when he assured her he 
had a yet larger sum lying at present useless in a Banker's hands, and promised 
to receive the same interest for his money he should be paid from the funds, 
she joyfully listened to him; and it was settled that they should send for the 
Jew, take his discharge, and utterly dismiss him.
Mr Monckton, however, fearful of appearing too officious in her affairs, wished 
not to have his part in the transaction published, and advised Cecilia not to 
reveal the matter to the Delviles. But great as was his [ascendancy] over her 
mind, her aversion to mystery and hypocrisy were still greater; she would not, 
therefore, give him this promise, though her own desire to wait some seasonable 
opportunity for disclosing it, made her consent that their meeting with the Jew 
should be at the house of Mrs Roberts in Fetter-lane, at twelve o'clock the 
next morning; where she might also see Mrs Hill and her children before she 
left town.
They now parted, Cecilia charmed more than ever with her friend, whose 
kindness, as she suspected not his motives, seemed to spring from the most 
disinterested generosity.
That, however, was the smallest feature in the character of Mr Monckton, who 
was entirely a man of the world, shrewd, penetrating, attentive to his 
interest, and watchful of every advantage to improve it. In the service he now 
did Cecilia, he was gratified by giving her pleasure, but that was by no means 
his only gratification; he still hoped her fortune would one day be his own, he 
was glad to transact any business with her, and happy in making her owe to him 
an obligation: but his principal inducement was yet stronger: he saw with much 
alarm the facility of her liberality; and he feared while she continued in 
correspondence with the Jew, that the easiness with which she could raise money 
would be a motive with her to continue the practice whenever she was softened 
by distress, or subdued by entreaty: but he hoped, by totally concluding the 
negociation, the temptation would be removed: and that the hazard and 
inconvenience of renewing it, would strengthen her aversion to such an 
expedient, till, between difficulties and disuse, that dangerous resource would 
be thought of no more.
Cecilia then returned to Mrs Harrel, whom she found as she had left, weeping in 
the arms of her brother. They consulted upon what was best to be done, and 
agreed that she ought instantly to leave town; for which purpose a chaise was 
ordered directly. They settled also that Mr Arnott, when he had conveyed her to 
his country house, which was in Suffolk, should hasten back to superintend the 
funeral, and see if anything could be saved from the creditors for his sister.
Yet this plan, till Cecilia was summoned to dinner, they had not the resolution 
to put in practice. They were then obliged to be gone, and their parting was 
very melancholy. Mrs Harrel wept immoderately, and Mr Arnott felt a concern too 
tender for avowal, though too sincere for concealment. Cecilia, however glad to 
change her situation, was extremely depressed by their sorrow, and entreated to 
have frequent accounts of their proceedings, warmly repeating her offers of 
service, and protestations of faithful regard.
She accompanied them to the chaise, and then went to the dining parlour, where 
she found Mr and Mrs Delvile, but saw nothing more of their son the whole day.
The next morning after breakfast, Mrs Delvile set out upon some leave-taking 
visits, and Cecilia went in a chair to Fetter-lane: here, already waiting for 
her, she met the punctual Mr Monckton, and the disappointed Jew, who most 
unwillingly was paid off, and relinquished his bonds; and who found in the 
severe and crafty Mr Monckton, another sort of man to deal with than the 
necessitous and heedless Mr Harrel.
As soon as he was dismissed, other bonds were drawn and signed, the old ones 
were destroyed; and Cecilia, to her infinite satisfaction, had no creditor but 
Mr Monckton. Her bookseller, indeed, was still unpaid, but her debt with him 
was public, and gave her not any uneasiness.
She now, with the warmest expressions of gratitude, took leave of Mr Monckton, 
who suffered the most painful struggles in repressing the various apprehensions 
to which the parting, and her establishment at the Delviles gave rise.
She then enquired briefly into the affairs of Mrs Hill, and having heard a 
satisfactory account of them, returned to St James's-square.






BOOK VI






