
One evening about this time, which was the latter end of July, Lady Honoria and 
Cecilia deferred walking out till very late, and then found it so pleasant, 
that they had strolled into the Park two miles from the house, when they were 
met by young Delvile; who, however, only reminded them how far they had to 
return, and walked on.
"He grows quite intolerable!" cried Lady Honoria, when he was gone; "it's 
really a melancholy thing to see a young man behave so like an old Monk. I dare 
say in another week he won't take off his hat to us; and, in about a fortnight, 
I suppose he'll shut himself up in one of those little round towers, and shave 
his head, and live upon roots, and howl if any body comes near him. I really 
half wonder he does not think it too dissipated to let Fidel run after him so. 
A thousand to one but he shoots him some day for giving a sudden bark when he's 
in one of these gloomy fits. Something, however, must certainly be the matter 
with him. Perhaps he is in love."
"Can nothing be the matter with him but that?" cried Cecilia.
"Nay, I don't know; but I am sure if he is, his Mistress has not much occasion 
to be jealous of you or me, for never, I think, were two poor Damsels so 
neglected!"
The utmost art of malice could not have furnished speech more truly mortifying 
to Cecilia than this thoughtless and accidental sally of Lady Honoria's: 
particularly, however, upon her guard, from the raillery she had already 
endured, she answered, with apparent indifference, "he is meditating, perhaps, 
upon Lady Euphrasia."
"O no," cried Lady Honoria, "for he did not take any notice of her when he saw 
her; I am sure if he marries her, it will only be because he cannot help it."
"Poor Lady Euphrasia!"
"O no, not at all; he'll make her two or three fine speeches, and then she'll 
be perfectly contented especially if he looks as dismally at her as he does at 
us! and that probably he will do the more readily for not liking to look at her 
at all. But she's such a romantic little thing, she'll never suspect him."
Here they were somewhat alarmed by a sudden darkness in the air, which was 
presently succeeded by a thunder storm; they instantly turned back, and began 
running home, when a violent shower of rain obliged them to take shelter under 
a large tree; where in two minutes they were joined by Delvile, who came to 
offer his assistance in hurrying them home; and finding the thunder and 
lightning continue, begged them to move on, in defiance of the rain, as their 
present situation exposed them to more danger than a wet hat and cloak, which 
might be changed in a moment.
Cecilia readily assented; but Lady Honoria, extremely frightened, protested she 
would not stir till the storm was over. It was in vain he represented her 
mistake in supposing herself in a place of security; she clung to the tree, 
screamed at every flash of lightning, and all her gay spirits were lost in her 
apprehensions.
Delvile then earnestly proposed to Cecilia conducting her home by herself, and 
returning again to Lady Honoria; but she thought it wrong to quit her 
companion, and hardly right to accept his assistance separately. They waited, 
therefore, some time all together; but the storm increasing with great 
violence, the thunder growing louder, and the lightning becoming stronger, 
Delvile grew impatient even to anger at Lady Honoria's resistance, and warmly 
expostulated upon its folly and danger. But the present was no season for 
lessons in philosophy; prejudices she had never been taught to surmount made 
her think herself in a place of safety, and she was now too much terrified to 
give argument fair play.
Finding her thus impracticable, Delvile eagerly said to Cecilia, "Come then, 
Miss Beverley, let us wait no longer; I will see you home, and then return to 
Lady Honoria."
"By no means," cried she, "my life is not more precious than either of yours, 
and therefore it may run the same risk."
"It is more precious," cried he with vehemence, "than the air I breathe!" and 
seizing her hand, he drew it under his arm, and, without waiting her consent, 
almost forced her away with him, saying as they ran, "How could a thousand Lady 
Honoria's recompense the world for the loss of one Miss Beverley? we may, 
indeed, find many thousand such as Lady Honoria, but such as Miss 
Beverley—where shall we ever find another?"
Cecilia, surprised, yet gratified, could not speak, for the speed with which 
they ran almost took away her breath; and before they were near home, 
slackening her pace, and panting, she confessed her strength was exhausted, and 
that she could go so fast no further.
"Let us then stop and rest," cried he; "but why will you not lean upon me? 
surely this is no time for scruples, and for idle and unnecessary scruples, 
Miss Beverley can never find a time."
Cecilia then, urged equally by shame at his speech and by weakness from 
fatigue, leant upon his arm but she soon repented her condescension; for 
Delvile, with an emotion he seemed to find wholly irrepressible, passionately 
exclaimed "sweet lovely burthen! O why not thus for ever!"
The strength of Cecilia was now instantly restored, and she hastily withdrew 
from his hold; he suffered her to disengage herself, but said in a faultering 
voice, "pardon me, Cecilia!—Madam!—Miss Beverley, I mean!—"
Cecilia, without making any answer, walked on by herself, as quick a pace as 
she was able; and Delvile, not venturing to oppose her, silently followed.
They had gone but a few steps, before there came a violent shower of hail; and 
the wind, which was very high, being immediately in their faces, Cecilia was so 
pelted and incommoded, that she was frequently obliged to stop, in defiance of 
her utmost efforts to force herself forward. Delvile then approaching her, 
proposed that she should again stand under a tree, as the thunder and lightning 
for the present seemed over, and wait there till the fury of the hail was past: 
and Cecilia, though never before so little disposed to oblige him, was so much 
distressed by the violence of the wind and hail, that she was forced to comply.
Every instant now seemed an age; yet neither hail nor wind abated: mean time 
they were both silent, and both, though with different feelings, equally 
comfortless.
Delvile, however, who took care to place himself on the side whence the wind 
blew hardest, perceived, in spite of his endeavours to save her, some 
hail-stones lodged upon her thin summer cloak: he then took off his own hat, 
and, though he ventured not to let it touch her, held it in such a manner as to 
shelter her better.
Cecilia now could no longer be either silent or unmoved, but turning to him 
with much emotion, said, "Why will you do this, Mr Delvile?"
"What would I not do," answered he, "to obtain forgiveness from Miss Beverley?"
"Well, well,—pray put on your hat."
"Do you command it?"
"No, certainly!—but I wish it."
"Ah!" cried he, instantly putting it on, "whose are the commands that would 
have half the weight with your wishes?"
And then, after another pause, he added, "do you forgive me?"
Cecilia, ashamed of the cause of their dissension, and softened by the 
seriousness of his manner, answered very readily, "yes, yes,—why will you 
make me remember such nonsense?"
"All sweetness," cried he warmly, and snatching her hand, "is Miss 
Beverley!—O that I had power—that it were not utterly impossible—that the 
cruelty of my situation—"
"I find," cried she, greatly agitated, and forcibly drawing away her hand, "you 
will teach me, for another time, the folly of fearing bad weather!"
And she hurried from beneath the tree; and Delvile perceiving one of the 
servants approach with an umbrella, went forward to take it from him, and 
directed him to hasten instantly to Lady Honoria.
Then returning to Cecilia, he would have held it over her head, but with an air 
of displeasure, she took it into her own hand.
"Will you not let me carry it for you?" he cried.
"No, Sir, there is not any occasion."
They then proceeded silently on.
The storm was now soon over; but it grew very dark, and as they had quitted the 
path while they ran, in order to get home by a shorter cut, the walk was so bad 
from the height of the grass, and the unevenness of the ground, that Cecilia 
had the utmost difficulty to make her way; yet she resolutely refused any 
assistance from Delvile, who walked anxiously by her side, and seemed equally 
fearful upon his own account and upon hers, to trust himself with being 
importunate.
At length they came to a place which Cecilia in vain tried to pass; Delvile 
then grew more urgent to help her; firm, however, in declining all aid, she 
preferred going a considerable way round to another part of the park which led 
to the house. Delvile, angry as well as mortified, proposed to assist her no 
more, but followed without saying a word.
Cecilia, though she felt not all the resentment she displayed, still thought it 
necessary to support it, as she was much provoked with the perpetual 
inconsistency of his behaviour, and deemed it wholly improper to suffer, 
without discouragement, occasional sallies of tenderness from one who, in his 
general conduct, behaved with the most scrupulous reserve.
They now arrived at the castle; but entering by a back way, came to a small and 
narrow passage which obstructed the entrance of the umbrella: Delvile once 
more, and almost involuntarily, offered to help her; but, letting down the 
spring, she coldly said she had no further use for it.
He then went forward to open a small gate which led by another long passage 
into the hall: but hearing the servants advance, he held it for an instant in 
his hand, while, in a tone of voice the most dejected, he said "I am grieved to 
find you thus offended; but were it possible you could know half the 
wretchedness of my heart, the generosity of your own would make you regret this 
severity!" and then, opening the gate, he bowed, and went another way.
Cecilia was now in the midst of servants; but so much shocked and astonished by 
the unexpected speech of Delvile, which instantly changed all her anger into 
sorrow, that she scarce knew what they said to her, nor what she replied; 
though they all with one voice enquired what was become of Lady Honoria, and 
which way they should run to seek her.
Mrs Delvile then came also, and she was obliged to recollect herself. She 
immediately proposed her going to bed, and drinking white wine whey to prevent 
taking cold: cold, indeed, she feared not; yet she agreed to the proposal, for 
she was confounded and dismayed by what had passed, and utterly unable to hold 
any conversation.
Her perplexity and distress were, however, all attributed to fatigue and 
fright; and Mrs Delvile, having assisted in hurrying her to bed, went to 
perform the same office for Lady Honoria, who arrived at that time.
Left at length by herself, she revolved in her mind the adventure of the 
evening, and the whole behaviour of Delvile since first she was acquainted with 
him. That he loved her with tenderness, with fondness loved her, seemed no 
longer to admit of any doubt, for however distant and cold he appeared, when 
acting with circumspection and design, the moment he was off his guard from 
surprise, terror, accident of any sort, the moment that he was betrayed into 
acting from nature and inclination, he was constantly certain to discover a 
regard the most animated and flattering.
This regard, however, was not more evident than his desire to conceal and to 
conquer it: he seemed to dread even her sight, and to have imposed upon himself 
the most rigid forbearance of all conversation or intercourse with her.
Whence could this arise? what strange and unfathomable cause could render 
necessary a conduct so mysterious? he knew not, indeed, that she herself wished 
it changed, but he could not be ignorant that his chance with almost any woman 
would at least be worth trying.
Was the obstacle which thus discouraged him the condition imposed by her 
uncle's will of giving her own name to the man she married? this she herself 
thought was an unpleasant circumstance, but yet so common for an heiress, that 
it could hardly out-weigh the many advantages of such a connection.
Henrietta again occurred to her; the letter she had seen in her hands was still 
unexplained: yet her entire conviction that Henrietta was not loved by him, 
joined to a certainty that affection alone could ever make him think of her, 
lessened upon this subject her suspicions every moment.
Lady Euphrasia Pemberton, at last, rested most upon her mind, and she thought 
it probable some actual treaty was negociating with the Duke of Derwent.
Mrs Delvile she had every reason to believe was her friend, though she was 
scrupulously delicate in avoiding either raillery or observation upon the 
subject of her son, whom she rarely mentioned, and never but upon occasions in 
which Cecilia could have no possible interest.
The Father, therefore, notwithstanding all Mr Monckton had represented to the 
contrary, appeared to be the real obstacle; his pride might readily object to 
her birth, which though not contemptible, was merely decent, and which, if 
traced beyond her grandfather, lost all title even to that epithet.
"If this, however," she cried, "is at last his situation, how much have I been 
to blame in censuring his conduct! for while to me he has appeared capricious, 
he has, in fact, acted wholly from necessity: if his father insists upon his 
forming another connection, has he not been honourable, prudent and just, in 
flying an object that made him think of disobedience, and endeavouring to keep 
her ignorant of a partiality it is his duty to curb?"
All, therefore, that remained for her to do or to resolve, was to guard her own 
secret with more assiduous care than ever, and since she found that their union 
was by himself thought impossible, to keep from his knowledge that the regret 
was not all his own.





