
On the fourth day the house wore a better aspect; Delvile's fever was gone, and 
Dr Lyster permitted him to leave his room: a cough, however, remained, and his 
journey to Bristol was settled to take place in three days. Cecilia, knowing he 
was now expected down stairs, hastened out of the parlour the moment she had 
finished her breakfast; for affected by his illness, and hurt at the 
approaching separation, she dreaded the first meeting, and wished to fortify 
her mind for bearing it with propriety.
In a very few minutes, Lady Honoria, running after her, entreated that she 
would come down; "for Mortimer," she cried, "is in the parlour, and the poor 
child is made so much of by its papa and mama, that I wish they don't half kill 
him by their ridiculous fondness. It is amazing to me he is so patient with 
them, for if they teized me half as much, I should be ready to jump up and 
shake them. But I wish you would come down, for I assure you it's a comical 
scene."
"Your ladyship is soon diverted! but what is there so comical in the anxiety of 
parents for an only son?"
"Lord, they don't care a straw for him all the time! it's merely that he may 
live to keep up this old castle, which I hope in my heart he will pull down the 
moment they are dead! But do pray come; it will really give you spirits to see 
them all. The father keeps ringing the bell to order half a hundred pair of 
boots for him, and all the greatcoats in the county; and the mother sits and 
looks as if a hearse and mourning coach were already coming over the 
drawbridge: but the most diverting object among them is my Lord Derford! O, it 
is really too entertaining to see him! there he sits, thinking the whole time 
of his challenge! I intend to employ him all this afternoon in practising to 
shoot at a mark."
And then again she pressed her to join the group, and Cecilia, fearing her 
opposition might seem strange, consented.
Delvile arose at her entrance, and, with tolerable steadiness, she 
congratulated him on his recovery: and then, taking her usual seat, employed 
herself in embroidering a screen. She joined too, occasionally, in the 
conversation, and observed, not without surprise, that Delvile seemed much less 
dejected than before his confinement.
Soon after, he ordered his horse, and, accompanied by Lord Derford, rode out. 
Mr Delvile then took Lord Ernolf to shew him some intended improvements in 
another part of the castle, and Lady Honoria walked away in search of any 
entertainment she could find.
Mrs Delvile, in better spirits than she had been for many days, sent for her 
own work, and sitting by Cecilia, conversed with her again as in former times; 
mixing instruction with entertainment, and general satire with particular 
kindness, in a manner at once so lively and so flattering, that Cecilia herself 
reviving, found but little difficulty in bearing her part in the conversation.
And thus, with some gaiety, and tolerable ease, was spent the greatest part of 
the morning; but just as they were talking of changing their dress for dinner, 
Lady Honoria with an air of the utmost exultation, came flying into the room. 
"Well, ma'am," she cried, "I have some news now that I must tell you, because 
it will make you believe me another time though I know it will put you in a 
passion."
"That's sweetly designed, at least!" said Mrs Delvile, laughing; "however, I'll 
trust you, for my passions will not, just now, be irritated by straws."
"Why, ma'am, don't you remember I told you when you were in town that Mr 
Mortimer kept a mistress—"
"Yes!" cried Mrs Delvile, disdainfully, "and you may remember, Lady Honoria, I 
told you—"
"O, you would not believe a word of it! but it's all true, I assure you! and 
now he has brought her down here; he sent for her about three weeks ago, and he 
has boarded her at a cottage, about half a mile from the Park-gate."
Cecilia, to whom Henrietta Belfield was instantly present, changed colour 
repeatedly, and turned so extremely sick, she could with difficulty keep her 
seat. She forced herself, however, to continue her work, though she knew so 
little what she was about, that she put her needle in and out of the same place 
without ceasing.
Meanwhile Mrs Delvile, with a countenance of the utmost indignation, exclaimed, 
"Lady Honoria, if you think a tale of scandal such as this reflects no disgrace 
upon its relater, you must pardon me for entreating you to find an auditor more 
of the same opinion than myself."
"Nay, ma'am, since you are so angry, I'll tell you the whole affair, for this 
is but half of it. He has a child here, too,—I vow I long to see it!—and he 
is so fond of it that he spends half his time in nursing it;—and that, I 
suppose, is the thing that takes him out so much; and I fancy, too, that's what 
has made him grow so grave, for may be he thinks it would not be pretty to be 
very frisky, now he's a papa."
Not only Cecilia, but Mrs Delvile herself was now overpowered, and she sat for 
some time wholly silent and confounded; Lady Honoria then, turning to Cecilia 
exclaimed, "Bless me, Miss Beverley, what are you about! why that flower is the 
most ridiculous thing I ever saw! you have spoilt your whole work."
Cecilia, in the utmost confusion, though pretending to laugh, then began to 
unpick it; and Mrs Delvile, recovering, more calmly, though not less angrily, 
said "And has this tale the honour of being invented solely by your ladyship, 
or had it any other assistant?"
"O no, I assure you, it's no invention of mine; I had it from very good 
authority upon my word. But only look at Miss Beverley! would not one think I 
had said that she had a child herself? She looks as pale as death. My dear, I 
am sure you can't be well?"
"I beg your pardon," cried Cecilia, forcing a smile, though extremely provoked 
with her; "I never was better."
And then, with the hope of appearing unconcerned, she raised her head; but 
meeting the eyes of Mrs Delvile fixed upon her face with a look of penetrating 
observation, abashed and guilty, she again dropt it, and resumed her work.
"Well, my dear," said Lady Honoria, "I am sure there is no occasion to send for 
Dr Lyster to you, for you recover yourself in a moment: you have the finest 
colour now I ever saw: has not she, Mrs Delvile? did you ever see anybody blush 
so becomingly?"
"I wish, Lady Honoria," said Mrs Delvile, with severity, "it were possible to 
see you blush!"
"O but I never do! not but what it's pretty enough too; but I don't know how it 
is, it never happens. Now Euphrasia can blush from morning to night. I can't 
think how she contrives it. Miss Beverley, too, plays at it vastly well; she's 
red and white, and white and red half a dozen times in a minute. Especially," 
looking at her archly, and lowering her voice, "if you talk to her of Mortimer!"
"No, indeed! no such thing!" cried Cecilia with some resentment, and again 
looking up; but glancing her eyes towards Mrs Delvile, and again meeting hers, 
filled with the strongest expression of enquiring solicitude, unable to sustain 
their inquisition, and shocked to find herself thus watchfully observed, she 
returned in hasty confusion to her employment.
"Well, my dear," cried Lady Honoria, again, "but what are you about now? do you 
intend to unpick the whole screen?"
"How can she tell what she is doing," said Mrs Delvile, with quickness, "if you 
torment her thus incessantly? I will take you away from her, that she may have 
a little peace. You shall do me the honour to attend my toilette, and acquaint 
me with some further particulars of this extraordinary discovery."
Mrs Delvile then left the room, but Lady Honoria, before she followed her, said 
in a low voice "Pity me, Miss Beverley, if you have the least good-nature! I am 
now going to hear a lecture of two hours long!"
Cecilia, left to herself was in a perturbation almost insupportable: Delvile's 
mysterious conduct seemed the result of some entanglement of vice; Henrietta 
Belfield, the artless Henrietta Belfield, she feared had been abused, and her 
own ill-fated partiality, which now more than ever she wished unknown even to 
herself, was evidently betrayed where most the dignity of her mind made her 
desire it to be concealed!
In this state of shame, regret and resentment, which made her forget to change 
her dress, or her place, she was suddenly surprised by Delvile.
Starting and colouring, she busied herself with collecting her work, that she 
might hurry out of the room. Delvile, though silent himself, endeavoured to 
assist her; but when she would have gone, he attempted to stop her, saying 
"Miss Beverley, for three minutes only."
"No, sir," cried she, indignantly, "not for an instant!" and leaving him 
utterly astonished, she hastened to her own apartment.
She was then sorry she had been so precipitate; nothing had been clearly proved 
against him; no authority was so likely to be fallacious as that of Lady 
Honoria; neither was he under any engagement to herself that could give her any 
right to manifest such displeasure. These reflections, however, came too late, 
and the quick feelings of her agitated mind were too rapid to wait the dictates 
of cool reason. At dinner she attended wholly to Lord Ernolf, whose assiduous 
politeness, profiting by the humour, saved her the painful effort of forcing 
conversation, or the guilty consciousness of giving way to silence, and enabled 
her to preserve her general tenor between taciturnity and loquaciousness. Mrs 
Delvile she did not once dare look at; but her son, she saw, seemed greatly 
hurt; yet it was proudly, not sorrowfully, and therefore she saw it with less 
uneasiness.
During the rest of the day, which was passed in general society, Mrs Delvile, 
though much occupied, frequently leaving the room, and sending for Lady 
Honoria, was more soft, kind and gentle with Cecilia than ever, looking at her 
with the utmost tenderness, often taking her hand, and speaking to her with 
even unusual sweetness. Cecilia with mingled sadness and pleasure observed this 
encreasing regard, which she could not but attribute to the discovery made 
through Lady Honoria's mischievous intelligence, and which, while it rejoiced 
her with the belief of her approbation, added fresh force to her regret in 
considering it was fruitless. Delvile, mean-time, evidently offended himself, 
conversed only with the gentlemen, and went very early into his own room.
When they were all retiring, Mrs Delvile, following Cecilia, dismissed her maid 
to talk with her alone.
"I am not, I hope, often," she cried, "solicitous or importunate to speak about 
my son: his character, I believe, wants no vindication; clear and unsullied, it 
has always been its own support: yet the aspersion cast upon it this morning by 
Lady Honoria, I think myself bound to explain, not partially as his mother, but 
simply as his friend."
Cecilia, who knew not whither such an explanation might lead, nor wherefore it 
was made, heard this opening with much emotion, but gave neither to that nor to 
what followed any interruption.
Mrs Delvile then continued: she had taken the trouble, she said, to sift the 
whole affair, in order to shame Lady Honoria by a pointed conviction of what 
she had invented, and to trace from the foundation the circumstances whence her 
surmises or report had sprung.
Delvile, it seems, about a fortnight before the present time, in one of his 
morning walks, had observed a gipsey sitting by the side of the high road, who 
seemed extremely ill, and who had a very beautiful child tied to her back.
Struck with the baby, he stopt to enquire to whom it belonged; to herself, she 
said, and begged his charity with the most pitiable cries of distress; telling 
him that she was travelling to join some of her fraternity, who were in a body 
near Bath, but was so ill with an ague and fever that she feared she should die 
on the road.
Delvile desired her to go to the next cottage, and promised to pay for her 
board there till she was better. He then spoke to the man and his wife who 
owned it to take them in, who, glad to oblige his Honour, instantly consented, 
and he had since called twice to see in what manner they went on.
"How simple," continued Mrs Delvile, "is a matter of fact in itself, and how 
complex when embellished! This tale has been told by the cottagers to our 
servants; it has travelled, probably gaining something from every mouth, to 
Lady Honoria's maid, and, having reached her ladyship, was swelled in a moment 
into all we heard! I think, however, that, for some time at least, her levity 
will be rather less daring. I have not, in this affair, at all spared her; I 
made her hear from Mortimer himself the little story as it happened; I then 
carried her to the cottage, where we had the whole matter confirmed; and I 
afterwards insisted upon being told myself by her maid all she had related to 
her lady, that she might thus be unanswerably convicted of inventing whatever 
she omitted. I have occasioned her some confusion, and, for the moment, a 
little resentment; but she is so volatile that neither will last; and though, 
with regard to my own family, I may perhaps have rendered her more cautious, I 
fear, with regard to the world in general, she is utterly incorrigible, because 
it has neither pleasure nor advantage to offer, that can compensate for the 
deprivation of relating one staring story, or ridiculous anecdote."
And then, wishing her good night, she added, "I make not any apology for this 
detail, which you owe, not, believe me, to a mother's folly, but, if I [know] 
myself at all, to a love of truth and justice. Mortimer, independent of all 
connection with me, cannot but to every body appear of a character which may be 
deemed even exemplary; calumny, therefore, falling upon such a subject, injures 
not only himself but society, since it weakens all confidence in virtue, and 
strengthens the scepticism of depravity."
She then left her.
"Ah!" thought Cecilia, "to me, at least, this solicitude for his fame needs no 
apology! humane and generous Delvile! never, again, will I a moment doubt your 
worthiness!" And then, cherishing that darling idea, she forgot all her cares 
and apprehensions, her quarrel, her suspicions, and the approaching separation, 
and, recompensed for every thing by this refutation of his guilt, she hastened 
to bed, and composed herself to rest.





