
One week only, however, had yet tried the perseverance of Cecilia, when, while 
she was working with Mrs Charlton in her dressing-room, her maid hastily 
entered it, and with a smile that seemed announcing welcome news, said, "Lord, 
ma'am, here's Fidel!" and, at the same moment, she was followed by the dog, who 
jumpt upon Cecilia in a transport of delight.
"Good heaven," cried she, all amazement, "who has brought him? whence does he 
come?"
"A country man brought him, ma'am; but he only put him in, and would not stay a 
minute."
"But whom did he enquire for?—who saw him?—what did he say?"
"He saw Ralph, ma'am."
Ralph, then, was instantly called: and these questions being repeated, he said, 
"Ma'am, it was a man I never saw before; but he only bid me take care to 
deliver the dog into your own hands, and said you would have a letter about him 
soon, and then went away: I wanted him to stay till I came up stairs, but he 
was off at once."
Cecilia, quite confounded by this account, could make neither comment nor 
answer; but, as soon as the servants had left the room, Mrs Charlton entreated 
to know to whom the dog had belonged, convinced by her extreme agitation, that 
something interesting and uncommon must relate to him.
This was no time for disguise; astonishment and confusion bereft Cecilia of all 
power to attempt it; and, after a very few evasions, she briefly communicated 
her situation with respect to Delvile, his leaving her, his motives, and his 
mother's evident concurrence: for these were all so connected with her 
knowledge of Fidel, that she led to them unavoidably in telling what she knew 
of him.
Very little penetration was requisite, to gather from her manner all that was 
united in her narrative of her own feelings and disappointment in the course of 
this affair: and Mrs Charlton, who had hitherto believed the whole world at her 
disposal, and that she continued single from no reason but her own difficulty 
of choice, was utterly amazed to find that any man existed who could withstand 
the united allurements of so much beauty, sweetness, and fortune. She felt 
herself sometimes inclined to hate, and at other times to pity him; yet 
concluded that her own extreme coldness was the real cause of his flight, and 
warmly blamed a reserve which had thus ruined her happiness.
Cecilia was in the extremest perplexity and distress to conjecture the meaning 
of so unaccountable a present, and so strange a message. Delvile, she knew, had 
desired the dog might follow him to Bristol; his mother, always pleased to 
oblige him, would now less than ever neglect any opportunity; she could not, 
therefore, doubt that she had sent or taken him thither, and thence, according 
to all appearances, he must now come. But was it likely Delvile would take such 
a liberty? Was it probable, when so lately he had almost exhorted her to forget 
him, he would even wish to present her with such a remembrance of himself? And 
what was the letter she was bid to expect? Whence and from what was it to come?
All was inexplicable! the only thing she could surmise, with any semblance of 
probability, was that the whole was some frolic of Lady Honoria Pemberton, who 
had persuaded Delvile to send her the dog, and perhaps assured him she had 
herself requested to have him.
Provoked by this suggestion, her first thought was instantly having him 
conveyed to the castle; but uncertain what the whole affair meant, and hoping 
some explanation in the letter she was promised, she determined to wait till it 
came, or at least till she heard from Mrs Delvile, before she took any measures 
herself in the business. Mutual accounts of their safe arrivals at Bristol and 
in Suffolk, had already passed between them, and she expected very soon to have 
further intelligence: though she was now, by the whole behaviour of Mrs 
Delvile, convinced she wished not again to have her an inmate of her house, and 
that the rest of her minority might pass, without opposition; in the house of 
Mrs Charlton.
Day after day, however, passed, and yet she heard nothing more; a week, a 
fortnight elapsed, and still no letter came. She now concluded the promise was 
a deception, and repented that she had waited a moment with any such 
expectation. Her peace, during this time, was greatly disturbed; this present 
made her fear she was thought meanly of by Mr Delvile; the silence of his 
mother gave her apprehensions for his health, and her own irresolution how to 
act, kept her in perpetual inquietude. She tried in vain to behave as if this 
incident had not happened; her mind was uneasy, and the same actions produced 
not the same effects; when she now worked or read, the sight of Fidel by her 
side distracted her attention; when she walked, it was the same, for Fidel 
always followed her; and though, in visiting her old acquaintance, she forbore 
to let him accompany her, she was secretly planning the whole time the contents 
of some letter, which she expected to meet with, on returning to Mrs Charlton's.
Those gentlemen in the country who, during the life-time of the Dean, had paid 
their addresses to Cecilia, again waited upon her at Mrs Charlton's, and 
renewed their proposals. They had now, however, still less chance of success, 
and their dismission was brief and decisive.
Among these came Mr Biddulph; and to him Cecilia was involuntarily most civil, 
because she knew him to be the friend of Delvile. Yet his conversation 
encreased the uneasiness of her suspence; for after speaking of the family in 
general which she had left, he enquired more particularly concerning Delvile, 
and then added, "I am, indeed, greatly grieved to find, by all the accounts I 
receive of him, that he is now in a very bad state of health."
This speech gave her fresh subject for apprehension; and in proportion as the 
silence of Mrs Delvile grew more alarming, her regard for her favourite Fidel 
became more partial. The affectionate animal seemed to mourn the loss of his 
master, and while sometimes she indulged herself in fancifully telling him her 
fears, she imagined she read in his countenance the faithfullest sympathy.
One week of her minority was now all that remained, and she was soon wholly 
occupied in preparations for coming of age. She purposed taking possession of a 
large house that had belonged to her uncle, which was situated only three miles 
from that of Mrs Charlton; and she employed herself in giving orders for 
fitting it up, and in hearing complaints, and promising indulgencies, to 
various of her tenants.
At this time, while she was at breakfast one morning, a letter arrived from Mrs 
Delvile. She apologised for not writing sooner, but added that various family 
occurrences, which had robbed her of all leisure, might easily be imagined, 
when she acquainted her that Mortimer had determined upon again going 
abroad.... They were all, she said, returned to Delvile Castle, but mentioned 
nothing either of the health of her son, or of her own regret, and filled up 
the rest of her letter, with general news and expressions of kindness: though, 
in a postscript, was inserted, "We have lost our poor Fidel."
Cecilia was still meditating upon this letter, by which her perplexity how to 
act was rather encreased than diminished, when, to her great surprise, Lady 
Honoria Pemberton was announced. She hastily begged one of the Miss Charltons 
to convey Fidel out of sight, from a dread of her raillery, should she, at 
last, be unconcerned in the transaction, and then went to receive her.
Lady Honoria, who was with her governess, gave a brief history of her quitting 
Delvile Castle, and said she was now going with her father to visit a noble 
family in Norfolk: but she had obtained his permission to leave him at the inn 
where they had slept, in order to make a short excursion to Bury, for the 
pleasure of seeing Miss Beverley.
"And therefore," she continued, "I can stay but half an hour; so you must give 
me some account of yourself as fast as possible."
"What account does your ladyship require?"
"Why, who you live with here, and who are your companions, and what you do with 
yourself."
"Why, I live with Mrs Charlton; and for companions, I have at least a score; 
here are her two grand-daughters, and Mrs and Miss—."
"Pho, pho," interrupted Lady Honoria, "but I don't mean such hum-drum 
companions as those; you'll tell me next, I suppose, of the parson and his wife 
and three daughters, with all their cousins and aunts: I hate those sort of 
people. What I desire to hear of is, who are your particular favourites; and 
whether you take long walks here, as you used to do at the Castle, and who you 
have to accompany you?" And then, looking at her very archly, she added, "A 
pretty little dog, now, I should think, would be vastly agreeable in such a 
place as this.—Ah, Miss Beverley! you have not left off that trick of 
colouring, I see!"
"If I colour now," said Cecilia, fully convinced of the justness of her 
suspicions, "I think it must be for your ladyship, not myself; for, if I am not 
much mistaken, either in person, or by proxy, a blush from Lady Honoria 
Pemberton would not, just now, be wholly out of season."
"Lord," cried she, "how like that is to a speech of Mrs Delvile's! She has 
taught you exactly her manner of talking. But do you know I am informed you 
have got Fidel with you here? O fie, Miss Beverley! What will papa and mamma 
say, when they find you have taken away poor little master's plaything?"
"And O fie, Lady Honoria! what shall I say, when I find you guilty of this 
mischievous frolic! I must beg, however, since you have gone thus far, that you 
will proceed a little farther, and send back the dog to the person from whom 
you received him."
"No, not I! manage him all your own way: if you chuse to accept dogs from 
gentlemen, you know, it is your affair, and not mine."
"If you really will not return him yourself, you must at least pardon me should 
you hear that I do in your ladyship's name."
Lady Honoria for some time only laughed and rallied, without coming to any 
explanation; but when she had exhausted all the sport she could make, she 
frankly owned that she had herself ordered the dog to be privately stolen, and 
then sent a man with him to Mrs Charlton's.
"But you know," she continued, "I really owed you a spite for being so 
ill-natured as to run away after sending me to call Mortimer to comfort and 
take leave of you."
"Do you dream, Lady Honoria? when did I send you?"
"Why you know you looked as if you wished it, and that was the same thing. But 
really it made me appear excessively silly, when I had forced him to come back 
with me, and told him you were waiting for him,—to see nothing of you at all, 
and not be able to find or trace you. He took it all for my own invention."
"And was it not your own invention?"
"Why that's nothing to the purpose; I wanted him to believe you sent me, for I 
knew else he would not come."
"Your ladyship was a great deal too good!"
"Why now suppose I had brought you together, what possible harm could have 
happened from it? It would merely have given each of you some notion of a fever 
and ague; for first you would both have been hot, and then you would both have 
been cold, and then you would both have turned red, and then you would both 
have turned white, and then you would both have pretended to simper at the 
trick; and then there would have been an end of it."
"This is a very easy way of settling it all," cried Cecilia laughing; "however, 
you must be content to abide by your own theft, for you cannot in conscience 
expect I should take it upon myself."
"You are terribly ungrateful, I see," said her ladyship, "for all the trouble 
and contrivance and expence I have been at merely to oblige you, while the 
whole time, poor Mortimer, I dare say, has had his sweet Pet advertised in all 
the newspapers, and cried in every market-town in the kingdom. By the way, if 
you do send him back, I would advise you to let your man demand the reward that 
has been offered for him, which may serve in part of payment for his travelling 
expenses."
Cecilia could only shake her head, and recollect Mrs Delvile's expression, that 
her levity was incorrigible.
"O if you had seen," she continued, "how sheepish Mortimer looked when I told 
him you were dying to see him before he set off! he coloured so!—just as you 
do now!—but I think you're vastly alike."
"I fear, then," cried Cecilia, not very angry at this speech, "there is but 
little chance your ladyship should like either of us."
"O yes, I do! I like odd people of all things."
"Odd people? and in what are we so very odd?"
"O, in a thousand things. You're so good, you know, and so grave, and so 
squeamish."
"Squeamish? how?"
"Why, you know, you never laugh at the old folks, and never fly at your 
servants, nor smoke people before their faces, and are so civil to the old 
fograms, you would make one imagine you liked nobody so well. By the way, I 
could do no good with my little Lord Derford; he pretended to find out I was 
only laughing at him, and so he minded nothing I told him. I dare say, however, 
his father made the detection, for I am sure he had not wit enough to discover 
it himself."
Cecilia then, very seriously began to entreat that she would return the dog 
herself, and confess her frolic, remonstrating in strong terms upon the 
mischievous tendency and consequences of such inconsiderate flights.
"Well," cried she, rising, "this is all vastly true; but I have no time to hear 
any more of it just now; besides, it's only forestalling my next lecture from 
Mrs Delvile, for you talk so much alike, that it is really very perplexing to 
me to remember which is which."
She then hurried away, protesting she had already outstayed her father's 
patience, and declaring the delay of another minute would occasion half a dozen 
expresses to know whether she was gone towards Scotland or Flanders.
This visit, however, was both pleasant and consolatory to Cecilia; who was now 
relieved from her suspence, and revived in her spirits by the intelligence that 
Delvile had no share in sending her a present, which, from him, would have been 
humiliating and impertinent. She regretted, indeed, that she had not instantly 
returned it to the castle, which she was now convinced was the measure she 
ought to have pursued; but to make all possible reparation, she determined that 
her own servant should set out with him the next morning to Bristol, and take a 
letter to Mrs Delvile to explain what had happened, since to conceal it from 
any delicacy to Lady Honoria, would be to expose herself to suspicions the most 
mortifying, for which that gay and careless young lady would never thank her.
She gave orders, therefore, to her servant to get ready for the journey.
When she communicated these little transactions to Mrs Charlton, that 
kind-hearted old lady, who knew her fondness for Fidel, advised her not yet to 
part with him, but merely to acquaint Mrs Delvile where he was, and what Lady 
Honoria had done, and, by leaving to herself the care of settling his 
restoration, to give her, at least, an opportunity of offering him to her 
acceptance.
Cecilia, however, would listen to no such proposal; she saw the firmness of 
Delvile in his resolution to avoid her, and knew that policy, as well as 
propriety, made it necessary she should part with what she could only retain to 
remind her of one whom she now most wished to forget.





