
As soon as Mrs Charlton was acquainted with the departure of young Delvile, she 
returned to Cecilia, impatient to be informed what had passed. The narration 
she heard both hurt and astonished her; that Cecilia, the Heiress of such a 
fortune, the possessor of so much beauty, descended of a worthy family, and 
formed and educated to grace a noble one, should be rejected by people to whom 
her wealth would be most useful, and only in secret have their alliance 
proposed to her, she deemed an indignity that called for nothing but 
resentment, and approved and enforced the resolution of her young friend to 
resist all solicitations which Mr and Mrs Delvile did not second themselves.
About, two hours after Delvile was gone, his letter arrived. Cecilia opened it 
with trepidation, and read as follows.
To Miss Beverley.
September 20, 1779.
What could be the apprehensions, the suspicions of Miss Beverley when so 
earnestly she prohibited my writing? From a temper so unguarded as mine could 
she fear any subtlety of doctrine? Is my character so little known to her that 
she can think me capable of craft or duplicity? Had I even the desire, I have 
neither the address nor the patience to practice them; no, loveliest Miss 
Beverley, though sometimes by vehemence I may incautiously offend, by 
sophistry, believe me, I never shall injure: my ambition, as I have told you, 
is to convince, not beguile, and my arguments shall be simple as my professions 
shall be sincere.
Yet how again may I venture to mention a proposal which so lately almost before 
you had heard you rejected? Suffer me, however, to assure you it resulted 
neither from insensibility to your delicacy, nor to my own duty; I made it, on 
the contrary, with that reluctance and timidity which were given me by an 
apprehension that both seemed to be offended by it:—but alas! already I have 
said what with grief I must repeat, I have no resource, no alternative, between 
receiving the honour of your hand in secret or foregoing you for ever.
You will wonder, you may well wonder at such a declaration; and again that 
severe renunciation with which you wounded me, will tremble on your lips,—Oh 
there let it stop! nor let the air again be agitated with sounds so discordant!
In that cruel and heart-breaking moment when I tore myself from you at Delvile 
Castle, I confessed to you the reason of my flight, and I determined to see you 
no more. I named not to you, then, my family, the potency of my own objections 
against daring to solicit your favour rendering theirs immaterial: my own are 
now wholly removed, but theirs remain in full force.
My father, descended of a race which though decaying in wealth, is unsubdued in 
pride, considers himself as the guardian of the honour of his house, to which 
he holds the name of his ancestors inseparably annexed my mother, born of the 
same family, and bred to the same ideas, has strengthened this opinion by 
giving it the sanction of her own.
Such being their sentiments; you will not, madam, be surprised that their only 
son, the sole inheritor of their fortune, and sole object of their 
expectations, should early have admitted the same. Indeed almost the first 
lesson I was taught was that of reverencing the family from which I am 
descended, and the name to which I am born. I was bid consider myself as its 
only remaining support, and sedulously instructed neither to act nor think but 
with a view to its aggrandizement and dignity.
Thus, unchecked by ourselves, and uncontrouled by the world, this haughty 
self-importance acquired by time a strength, and by mutual encouragement a 
firmness, which Miss Beverley alone could possibly, I believe, have shaken! 
What, therefore, was my secret alarm, when first I was conscious of the force 
of her attractions, and found my mind wholly occupied with admiration of her 
excellencies! All that pride could demand, and all to which ambition could 
aspire, all that happiness could covet, or the most scrupulous delicacy exact, 
in her I found united; and while my heart was enslaved by her charms, my 
understanding exulted in its fetters. Yet to forfeit my name, to give up 
for-ever a family which upon me rested its latest expectations,—Honour, I 
thought forbad it, propriety and manly spirit revolted at the sacrifice. The 
renunciation of my birth-right seemed a desertion of the post in which I was 
stationed: I forbore, therefore, even in my wishes, to solicit your favour, and 
vigorously determined to fly you as dangerous to my peace, because unattainable 
without dishonour.
Such was the intended regulation of my conduct at the time I received 
Biddulph's letter; in three days I was to leave England; my father, with much 
persuasion, had consented to my departure; my mother, who penetrated into my 
motives, had never opposed it: but how great was the change wrought upon my 
mind by reading that letter! my steadiness forsook me, my resolution wavered; 
yet I thought him deceived, and attributed his suspicions to jealousy: but 
still, Fidel I knew was missing—and to hear he was your darling 
companion—was it possible to quit England in a state of such uncertainty? to 
be harassed in distant climates with conjectures I might then never satisfy? 
No; I told my friends I must visit Biddulph before I left the kingdom, and 
promising to return to them in three or four days, I hastily set out for 
Suffolk, and rested not till I arrived at Mrs Charlton's.
What a scene there awaited me! to behold the loved mistress of my heart, the 
opposed, yet resistless object of my fondest admiration, caressing an animal 
she knew to be mine, mourning over him his master's ill health, and sweetly 
recommending to him fidelity,—Ah! forgive the retrospection, I will dwell on 
it no longer. Little, indeed, had I imagined with what softness the dignity of 
Miss Beverley was blended, though always conscious that her virtues, her 
attractions, and her excellencies, would reflect lustre upon the highest 
station to which human grandeur could raise her, and would still be more 
exalted than her rank, though that were the most eminent upon earth.—And had 
there been a thousand, and ten thousand obstacles to oppose my addressing her, 
vigorously and undauntedly would I have combated with them all, in preference 
to yielding to this single objection!
Let not the frankness of this declaration irritate you, but rather let it serve 
to convince you of the sincerity of what follows: various as are the calamities 
of life which may render me miserable, YOU only, among even its chosen 
felicities, have power to make me happy. Fame, honours, wealth, ambition, were 
insufficient without you; all chance of internal peace, and every softer hope 
is now centered in your favour, and to lose you, from whatever cause, ensures 
me wretchedness unmitigated. With respect therefore to myself, the die is 
finally cast, and the conflict between bosom felicity and family pride is 
deliberately over. This name which so vainly I have cherished and so painfully 
supported, I now find inadequate to recompense me for the sacrifice which its 
preservation requires. I part with it, I own, with regret that the surrender is 
necessary; yet is it rather an imaginary than an actual evil, and though a deep 
wound to pride, no offence to morality.
Thus have I laid open to you my whole heart, confessed my perplexities, 
acknowledged my vain-glory, and exposed with equal sincerity the sources of my 
doubts, and the motives of my decision: but now, indeed, how to proceed I know 
not; the difficulties which are yet to encounter I fear to enumerate, and the 
petition I have to urge I have scarce courage to mention.
My family, mistaking ambition for honour, and rank for dignity, have long 
planned a splendid connection for me, to which though my invariable repugnance 
has stopt any advances, their wishes and their views immovably adhere. I am but 
too certain they will now listen to no other. I dread, therefore, to make a 
trial where I despair of success, I know not how to risk a prayer with those 
who may silence me by a command.
In a situation so desperate, what then remains? Must I make an application with 
a certainty of rejection, and then mock all authority by acting in defiance of 
it? Or, harder task yet! relinquish my dearest hopes when no longer persuaded 
of their impropriety? Ah! sweetest Miss Beverley, end the struggle at once! My 
happiness, my peace, are wholly in your power, for the moment of our union 
secures them for life.
It may seem to you strange that I should thus purpose to brave the friends whom 
I venture not to entreat; but from my knowledge of their characters and 
sentiments I am certain I have no other resource. Their favourite principles 
were too early imbibed to be now at this late season eradicated. Slaves that we 
all are to habits, and dupes to appearances, jealous guardians of our pride, to 
which our comfort is sacrificed, and even our virtue made subservient, what 
conviction can be offered by reason, to notions that exist but by prejudice? 
They have been cherished too long for rhetorick to remove them, they can only 
be expelled by all-powerful Necessity. Life is, indeed, too brief, and success 
too precarious, to trust, in any case where happiness is concerned, the 
extirpation of deep-rooted and darling opinions, to the slow-working influence 
of argument and disquisition.
Yet bigotted as they are to rank and family, they adore Miss Beverley, and 
though their consent to the forfeiture of their name might forever be denied, 
when once they beheld her the head and ornament of their house, her elegance 
and accomplishments joined to the splendour of her fortune, would speedily make 
them forget the plans which now wholly absorb them. Their sense of honour is in 
nothing inferior to their sense of high birth; your condescension, therefore, 
would be felt by them in its fullest force, and though, during their first 
surprize, they might be irritated against their son, they would make it the 
study of their lives that the lady who for him had done so much, should never, 
through their means, repine for herself.
With regard to settlements, the privacy of our union would not affect them: one 
Confident we must unavoidably trust, and I would deposit in the hands of 
whatever person you would name, a bond by which I would engage myself to settle 
both your fortune and my own, according to the arbitration of our mutual 
friends. The time for secrecy though painful would be short, and even from the 
altar, if you desired it, I would hasten to Delvile Castle. Not one Of my 
friends should you see till they waited upon you themselves to solicit your 
presence at their house, till our residence elsewhere was fixed.
Oh loveliest Cecilia, from a dream Of happiness so sweet awaken me not! from a 
plan Of felicity so attractive turn not away! If one part of it is unpleasant, 
reject not therefore all; and since without some drawback no earthly bliss is 
attainable, do not, by a refinement too scrupulous for the short period of our 
existence, deny yourself that delight which your benevolence will afford you, 
in snatching from the pangs of unavailing regret and misery, the gratefullest 
of men in the humblest and most devoted of your servants, MORTIMER DELVILE.
Cecilia read and re-read this letter, but with a perturbation of mind that made 
her little able to weigh its contents. Paragraph by paragraph her sentiments 
varied, and her determination was changed: the earnestness of his supplication 
now softened her into compliance, the acknowledged pride of his family now 
irritated her into resentment, and the confession of his own regret now 
sickened her into despondence. She meant in an immediate answer, to have 
written a final dismission; but though proof against his entreaties, because 
not convinced by his arguments, there was something in the conclusion of his 
letter that staggered her resolution.
Those scruples and that refinement against which he warned her, she herself 
thought might be overstrained, and to gratify unnecessary punctilio, the short 
period of existence be rendered causelessly unhappy. He had truly said that 
their union would be no offence to morality, and with respect merely to pride, 
why should that be spared? He knew he possessed her heart, she had long been 
certain of his, her character had early gained the affection of his mother, and 
the essential service which an income such as hers must do the family, would 
soon be felt too powerfully to make her connection with it regretted.
These reflections were so pleasant she knew not how to discard them; and the 
consciousness that her secret was betrayed not only to himself, but to Mr 
Biddulph, Lord Ernolf, Lady Honoria Pemberton, and Mrs Delvile, gave them 
additional force, by making it probable she was yet more widely suspected. But 
still her delicacy and her principles revolted against a conduct of which the 
secrecy seemed to imply the impropriety. "How shall I meet Mrs Delvile," cried 
she, "after an action so clandestine? How, after praise such as she has 
bestowed upon me, bear the severity of her eye, when she thinks I have seduced 
from her the obedience of her son! A son who is the sole solace and first hope 
of her existence, whose virtues make all her happiness, and whose filial piety 
is her only glory!—And well may she glory in a son such as Delvile! Nobly has 
he exerted himself in situations the most difficult, his family and his ideas 
of honour he has preferred to his peace and health, he has fulfilled with 
spirit and integrity the various, the conflicting duties of life. Even now, 
perhaps, in his present application, he may merely think himself bound by 
knowing me no longer free, and his generous sensibility to the weakness he has 
discovered, without any of the conviction to which he pretends, may have 
occasioned this proposal!"
A suggestion so mortifying again changed her determination; and the tears of 
Henrietta Belfield, with the letter which she had surprized in her hand 
recurring to her memory, all her thoughts turned once more upon rejecting him 
for-ever.
In this fluctuating state of mind she found writing impracticable; while 
uncertain what to wish, to decide was impossible. She disdained coquetry, she 
was superior to trifling, the candour and openness of Delvile had merited all 
her sincerity, and therefore while any doubt remained, with herself, she held 
it unworthy her character to tell him she had none.
Mrs Charlton, upon reading the letter, became again the advocate of Delvile; 
the frankness with which he had stated his difficulties assured her of his 
probity, and by explaining his former conduct, satisfied her with the rectitude 
of his future intentions. "Do not, therefore, my dear child," cried she, 
"become the parent of your own misery by refusing him; he deserves you alike 
from his principles and his affection, and the task would both be long and 
melancholy to disengage him from your heart. I see not, however, the least 
occasion for the disgrace of a private marriage; I know not any family to which 
you would not be an honour, and those who feel not your merit, are little worth 
pleasing. Let Mr Delvile, therefore, apply openly to his friends, and if they 
refuse their consent, be their prejudices their reward. You are freed from all 
obligations where caprice only can raise objections, and you may then, in the 
face of the world, vindicate your choice."
The wishes of Cecilia accorded with this advice, though the general tenour of 
Delvile's letter gave her little reason to expect he would follow it.





