
The day passed on without any intelligence; the next day, also, passed in the 
same manner, and on the third, which was her birthday, Cecilia became of age.
The preparations which had long been making among her tenants to celebrate this 
event, Cecilia appeared to take some share, and endeavoured to find some 
pleasure in. She gave a public dinner to all who were willing to partake of it, 
she promised redress to those who complained of hard usage, she pardoned many 
debts, and distributed money, food, and clothing to the poor. These benevolent 
occupations made time seem less heavy, and while they freed her from solitude, 
diverted her suspense. She still, however, continued at the house of Mrs 
Charlton, the workmen having disappointed her in finishing her own.
But, in defiance of her utmost exertion, towards the evening of this day the 
uneasiness of her uncertainty grew almost intolerable. The next morning she had 
promised Delvile to set out for London, and he expected the morning after to 
claim her for his wife; yet Mr Monckton neither sent nor came, and she knew not 
if her letter was delivered, or if still he was unprepared for the 
disappointment by which he was awaited. A secret regret for the unhappiness she 
must occasion him, which silently yet powerfully reproached her, stole fast 
upon her mind, and poisoned its tranquility; for though her opinion was 
invariable in holding his proposal to be wrong, she thought too highly of his 
character to believe he would have made it but from a mistaken notion it was 
right. She painted him, therefore, to herself, as glowing with indignation, 
accusing her of inconsistency, and perhaps suspecting her of coquetry, and 
imputing her change of conduct to motives the most trifling and narrow, till 
with resentment and disdain, he drove her wholly from his thoughts.
In a few minutes, however, the picture was reversed; Delvile no more appeared 
storming nor unreasonable; his face wore an aspect of sorrow, and his brow was 
clouded with disappointment: he forbore to reproach her, but the look which her 
imagination delineated was more piercing than words of severest import.
These images pursued and tormented her, drew tears from her eyes, and loaded 
her heart with anguish. Yet, when she recollected that her conduct had had in 
view an higher motive than pleasing Delvile, she felt that it ought to offer 
her an higher satisfaction: she tried, therefore, to revive her spirits, by 
reflecting upon her integrity, and refused all indulgence to this enervating 
sadness, beyond what the weakness of human nature demands, as some relief to 
its sufferings upon every fresh attack of misery.
A conduct such as this was the best antidote against affliction, whose arrows 
are never with so little difficulty repelled, as when they light upon a 
conscience which no self-reproach has laid bare to their malignancy.
Before six o'clock the next morning, her maid came to her bedside with the 
following letter, which she told; her had been brought by an express.
To Miss Beverley.
May this letter, with one only from Delvile Castle, be the last that Miss 
Beverley may ever receive!
Yet sweet to me as is that hope, I write in the utmost uneasiness; I have just 
heard that a gentleman, whom, by the description that is given of him, I 
imagine is Mr Monckton, has been in search of me with a letter which he was 
anxious to deliver immediately.
Perhaps this letter is from Miss Beverley, perhaps it contains directions which 
ought instantly to be followed: could I divine what they are, with what 
eagerness would I study to anticipate their execution! It will not, I hope, be 
too late to receive them on Saturday, when her power over my actions will be 
confirmed, and when every wish she will communicate, shall be gratefully, 
joyfully, and with delight fulfilled.
I have sought Belfield in vain; he has left Lord Vannelt, and no one knows 
whither he is gone. I have been obliged, therefore, to trust a stranger to draw 
up the bond; but he is a man of good character, and the time of secrecy will be 
too short to put his discretion in much danger. To-morrow, Friday, I shall 
spend solely in endeavouring to discover. Mr Monckton; I have leisure 
sufficient for the search, since so prosperous has been my diligence, that 
every thing is prepared!
I have seen some lodgings in Pall-Mall, which I think are commodious and will 
suit you: send a servant, therefore, before you to secure them. If upon your 
arrival I should venture to meet you there, be not, I beseech you, offended or 
alarmed; I shall take every possible precaution neither to be known nor seen, 
and I will stay with you only three minutes. The messenger who carries this is 
ignorant from whom it comes, for I fear his repeating my name among your 
servants, and he could scarce return to me with an answer before you will 
yourself be in town. Yes, loveliest Cecilia! at the very moment you receive 
this letter, the chaise will, I flatter myself, be at the door, which is to 
bring to me a treasure that will enrich every future hour of my life! And oh as 
to me it will be exhaustless, may but its sweet dispenser experience some share 
of the happiness she bestows, and then what, save her own purity, will be so 
perfect, so unsullied, as the felicity of her! M.D.
The perturbation of Cecilia upon reading this letter was unspeakable: Mr 
Monckton, she found, had been wholly unsuccessful, all her heroism had answered 
no purpose, and the transaction was as backward as before she had exerted it.
She was, now, therefore, called upon to think and act entirely for herself. Her 
opinion was still the same, nor did her resolution waver, yet how to put it in 
execution she could not discern. To write to him was impossible, since she was 
ignorant where he was to be found; to disappoint him at the last moment she 
could not resolve, since such a conduct appeared to her unfeeling and 
unjustifiable; for a few instants she thought of having him waited for at night 
in London, with a letter; but the danger of entrusting any one with such a 
commission, and the uncertainty of finding him, should he disguise himself, 
made the success of this scheme too precarious for trial.
One expedient alone occurred to her, which, though she felt to be hazardous, 
she believed was without an alternative: this was no other than hastening to 
London herself, consenting to the interview he had proposed in Pall-Mall, and 
then, by strongly stating her objections, and confessing the grief they 
occasioned her, to pique at once his generosity and his pride upon releasing 
her himself from the engagement into which he had entered.
She had no time to deliberate; her plan, therefore, was decided almost as soon 
as formed, and every moment being precious, she was obliged to awaken Mrs 
Charlton, and communicate to her at once the letter from Delvile, and the new 
resolution she had taken.
Mrs Charlton, having no object in view but the happiness of her young friend, 
with a facility that looked not for objections, and scarce saw them when 
presented, agreed to the expedition, and kindly consented to accompany her to 
London; for Cecilia, however concerned to hurry and fatigue her, was too 
anxious for the sanction of her presence to hesitate in soliciting it.
A chaise, therefore, was ordered; and with posthorses for speed, and two 
servants on horseback, the moment Mrs Charlton was ready, they set out on their 
journey.
Scarce had they proceeded two miles on their way, when they were met by Mr 
Monckton, who was hastening to their house.
Amazed and alarmed at a sight so unexpected, he stopt the chaise to enquire 
whither they were going.
Cecilia, without answering, asked if her letter had yet been received?
"I could not," said Mr Monckton, "deliver it to a man who was not to be found: 
I was at this moment coming to acquaint how vainly I had sought him; but still 
that your journey is unnecessary unless voluntary, since I have left it at the 
house where you told me you should meet to-morrow morning, and where he must 
then unavoidably receive it."
"Indeed, Sir," cried Cecilia, "to-morrow morning will be too late,—in 
conscience, in justice, and even in decency too late! I must, therefore, go to 
town; yet I go not, believe me, in' opposition to your injunctions, but to 
enable myself, without treachery or dishonour, to fulfil them."
Mr Monckton, aghast and confounded, made not any answer, till Cecilia gave 
orders to the postilion to drive on: he then hastily called to stop him, and 
began the warmest expostulations; but Cecilia, firm when she believed herself 
right, though wavering when fearful she was wrong, told him it was now too late 
to change her plan, and repeating her orders to the postilion, left him to his 
own reflections: grieved herself to reject his counsel, yet too intently 
occupied by her own affairs and designs, to think long of any other.





