
At——they stopt for dinner; Mrs Charlton being too much fatigued to go on 
without some rest, though the haste of Cecilia to meet Delvile time enough for 
new arranging their affairs, made her regret every moment that was spent upon 
the road.
Their meal was not long, and they were returning to their chaise, when they 
were suddenly encountered by Mr Morrice, who was just alighted from his horse.
He congratulated himself upon the happiness of meeting them with the air of a 
man who nothing doubted that happiness being mutual; then hastening to speak of 
the Grove, "I could hardly," he cried, "get away; my friend Monckton won't know 
what to do without me, for Lady Margaret, poor old soul, is in a shocking bad 
way indeed; there's hardly any staying in the room with her; her breathing is 
just like the grunting of a hog. She can't possibly last long, for she's quite 
upon her last legs, and tumbles about so when she walks alone, one would swear 
she was drunk."
"If you take infirmity," said Mrs Charlton, who was now helped into the chaise, 
"for intoxication, you must suppose no old person sober."
"Vastly well said, ma'am," cried he; "I really forgot your being an old lady 
yourself, or I should not have made the observation. However, as to poor Lady 
Margaret, she may do as well as ever by and bye, for she has an excellent 
constitution, and I suppose she has been hardly any better than she is now 
these forty years, for I remember when I was quite a boy hearing her called a 
limping old puddle."
"Well, we'll discuss this matter, if you please," said Cecilia, "some other 
time." And ordered the postilion to drive on. But before they came to their 
next stage, Morrice having changed his horse, joined them, and rode on by their 
side, begging them to observe what haste he had made on purpose to have the 
pleasure of escorting, them.
This forwardness was very offensive to Mrs Charlton, whose years and character 
had long procured her more deference and respect: but Cecilia, anxious only to 
hasten her journey, was indifferent to every thing, save what retarded it.
At the same Inn they both again changed horses, and he still continued riding 
with them, and occasionally talking, till they were within twenty miles of 
London, when a disturbance upon the road exciting his curiosity, he hastily 
rode away from them to enquire into its cause.
Upon coming up to the place whence it proceeded, they saw a party of gentlemen 
on horseback surrounding a chaise which had been just overturned; and while the 
confusion in the road obliged the postilion to stop Cecilia heard a lady's 
voice exclaiming, "I declare I dare say I am killed!" and instantly 
recollecting Miss Larolles, the fear of discovery and delay made her desire the 
man to drive on with all speed. He was preparing to obey her, but Morrice, 
gallopping after them, called out, "Miss Beverley, one of the ladies that has 
been overturned, is an acquaintance of yours. I used to see her with you at Mrs 
Harrel's."
"Did you?" said Cecilia, much disconcerted, "I hope she is not hurt?'
"No, not at all; but the lady with her is bruised to death; won't you come and 
see her?"
"I am too much in haste at present,—and I can do them no good; but Mrs 
Charlton I am sure will spare her servant, if he can be of any use."
"O but the young lady wants to speak to you; she is coming up to the chaise as 
fast as ever she can."
"And how should she know me?" cried Cecilia, with much surprise; "I am sure she 
could not see me."
"O, I told her,", answered Morrice, with a nod of self-approbation for what he 
had done, "I told her it was you, for I knew I could soon overtake you."
Displeasure at this officiousness was unavailing, for looking out of the 
window, she perceived Miss Larolles, followed by half her party, not three 
paces from the chaise.
"O my dear creature," she called out, "what a terrible accident! I assure you I 
am so monstrously frightened you've no idea. It's the luckiest thing in the 
world that you were going this way. Never any thing happened so excessively 
provoking; you've no notion what a fall we've had. It's horrid shocking, I 
assure you. How have you been all this time? You can't conceive how glad I am 
to see you."
"And to which will Miss Beverley answer first," cried a voice which announced 
Mr Gosport, "the joy or the sorrow? For so adroitly are they blended, that a 
common auditor could with difficulty decide, whether condolence, or 
congratulation should have the precedency."
"How can you be so excessive horrid," cried Miss Larolles, "to talk of 
congratulation, when one's in such a shocking panic that one does not know if 
one's dead or alive!"
"Dead, then, for any wager," returned he, "if we may judge by your stillness."
"I desire, now, you won't begin joking," cried she, "for I assure you it's an 
excessive serious affair. I was never so rejoiced in my life as when I found I 
was not killed. I've been so squeezed you've no notion. I thought for a full 
hour I had broke both my arms."
"And my heart at the same time," said Mr Gosport; "I hope you did not imagine 
that the least fragile of the three?"
"All our hearts, give me leave to add," said Captain Aresby—just then 
advancing, "all our hearts must have been abimés, by the indisposition of Miss 
Larolles, had not their doom been fortunately revoked by the sight of Miss 
Beverley."
"Well, this is excessive odd,", cried Miss Larolles, "that every body should 
run away so from poor Mrs Mears; she'll be so affronted you've no idea. I 
thought, Captain Aresby, you would have stayed to take care of her."
"I'll run and see how she is myself," cried Morrice, and away he gallopped.
"Really, ma'am," said the Captain, "I am quite au desespoir to have failed in 
any of my devoirs; but I make it a principle to be a mere looker on upon these 
occasions, lest I should be so unhappy as to commit any faux pas by too much 
empressement."
"An admirable caution!" said Mr Gosport, "and, to so ardent a temper, a 
necessary check!"
Cecilia, whom the surprise and vexation of so unseasonable a meeting, when she 
particularly wished to have escaped all notice, had hitherto kept in painful 
silence, began now to recover some presence of mind; and making her compliments 
to Miss Larolles and Mr Gosport, with a slight bow to the Captain, she 
apologized for hurrying away, but told them she had an engagement in London 
which could not be deferred, and was then giving orders to the postilion to 
drive on, when Morrice returning full speed, called out "The poor lady's so bad 
she is not able to stir a step; she can't put a foot to the ground, and she 
says she's quite black and blue; so I told her I was sure Miss Beverley would 
not refuse to make room for her in her chaise, till the other can be put to 
rights; and she says she shall take it as a great favour. Here, postilion, a 
little more to the right! come, ladies and gentlemen, get out of the way." This 
impertinence, however extraordinary, Cecilia could not oppose; for Mrs 
Charlton, ever compassionate and complying where there was any appearance of 
distress, instantly seconded the proposal: the chaise, therefore, was turned 
back, and she was obliged to offer a place in it to Mrs Mears, who, though more 
frightened than hurt, readily accepted it, notwithstanding, to make way for her 
without incommoding Mrs Charlton, she was forced to get out herself.
She failed not, however, to desire that all possible expedition might be used 
in refitting the other chaise for their reception; and all the gentlemen but 
one, dismounted their horses, in order to assist, or seem to assist in getting 
it ready.
This only unconcerned spectator in the midst of the apparent general bustle, 
was Mr Meadows; who viewed all that passed without troubling himself to 
interfere, and with an air of the most evident carelessness whether matters 
went well or went ill.
Miss Larolles, now returning to the scene of action, suddenly screamed out, "O 
dear, where's my little dog! I never thought of him, I declare! I love him 
better than any thing in the world. I would not have him hurt for a hundred 
thousand pounds. Lord, where is he?"
"Crushed or suffocated in the overturn, no doubt," said Mr Gosport; "but as you 
must have been his executioner, what softer death could he die? If you will 
yourself inflict the punishment, I will submit to the same fate."
"Lord, how you love to plague one!" cried she and then enquired among the 
servants what was become of her dog. The poor little animal, forgotten by its 
mistress, and disregarded by all others, was now discovered by its yelping; and 
soon found to have been the most material sufferer by the overturn, one of its 
fore legs being broken.
Could screams or lamentations, reproaches to the servants, or complaints 
against the Destinies, have abated his pain, or made a callus of the fracture, 
but short would have been the duration of his misery; for neither words were 
saved, nor lungs were spared, the very air was rent with cries, and all present 
were upbraided as if accomplices in the disaster.
The postilion, at length, interrupted this vociferation with news that the 
chaise was again fit for use; and Cecilia, eager to be gone, finding him little 
regarded, repeated what he said to Miss Larolles.
"The chaise?" cried she, "why you don't suppose I'll ever get into that horrid 
chaise any more? I do assure you I would not upon any account."
"Not get into it?" said Cecilia, "for what purpose, then, have we all waited 
till it was ready?"
"O, I declare I would not go in it for forty thousand worlds. I would rather 
walk to an inn, if it's a hundred and fifty miles off."
"But as it happens," said Mr Gosport, "to be only seven miles, I fancy you will 
condescend to ride."
"Seven miles! Lord, how shocking! you frighten me so you have no idea. Poor Mrs 
Mears! She'll have to go quite alone. I dare say the chaise will be down fifty 
times by the way. Ten to one but she breaks her neck! only conceive how horrid! 
I assure you I am excessive glad I am out of it."
"Very friendly, indeed!" said Mr Gosport. "Mrs Mears, then, may break her bones 
at her leisure!"
Mrs Mears, however, when applied to, professed an equal aversion to the 
carriage in which she had been so unfortunate, and declared she would rather 
walk than return to it, though one of her ancles was already so swelled that 
she could hardly stand.
"Why then the best way, ladies," cried Morrice, with the look of a man happy in 
vanquishing all difficulties, "will be for Mrs Charlton, and that poor lady 
with the bruises, to go together in that sound chaise, and then for us 
gentlemen to escort this young lady and Miss Beverley on foot, till we all come 
to the next inn. Miss Beverley, I know, is an excellent walker, for I have 
heard Mr Monckton say so."
Cecilia, though in the utmost consternation at a proposal, which must so long 
retard a journey she had so many reasons to wish hastened, knew not how either 
in decency or humanity to oppose it: and the fear of raising suspicion, from a 
consciousness how much there was to suspect, forced her to curb her impatience, 
and reduced her even to repeat the offer which Morrice had made, though she 
could scarce look at him for anger at his unseasonable forwardness.
No voice dissenting, the troop began to be formed. The foot consisted of the 
two young ladies, and Mr Gosport, who alighted to walk with Cecilia; the 
cavalry, of Mr Meadows, the Captain, and Morrice, who walked their horses a 
foot pace, while the rest of the party rode on with the chaise, as attendants 
upon Mrs Mears.
Just before they set off, Mr Meadows, riding negligently up to the carriage, 
exerted himself so far as to say to Mrs Mears, "Are you hurt, ma'am?" and, at 
the same instant, seeming to recollect Cecilia, he turned about, and yawning 
while he touched his hat, said, "O, how d'ye do, ma'am?" and then, without 
waiting an answer to either of his questions, flapped it over his eyes, and 
joined the cavalcade, though without appearing to have any consciousness that 
he belonged to it.
Cecilia would most gladly have used the rejected chaise herself, but could not 
make such a proposal to Mrs Charlton, who was past the age and the courage for 
even any appearance of enterprize. Upon enquiry, however, she had the 
satisfaction to hear that the distance to the next stage was but two miles, 
though multiplied to seven by the malice of Mr Gosport.
Miss Larolles carried her little dog in her arms, declaring she would never 
more trust him a moment away from her. She acquainted Cecilia that she had been 
for some time upon a visit to Mrs Mears, who, with the rest of the party, had 
taken her to see—house and gardens, where they had made an early dinner, from 
which they were just returning home when the chaise broke down.
She then proceeded, with her usual volubility, to relate the little nothings 
that had passed since the winter, flying from subject to subject, with no 
meaning but to be heard, and no wish but to talk, ever rapid in speech, though 
minute in detail. This loquacity met not with any interruption, save now and 
then a sarcastic remark, from Mr Gosport; for Cecilia was too much occupied by 
her own affairs, to answer or listen to such uninteresting discourse.
Her silence, however, was at length forcibly broken; Mr Gosport, taking 
advantage of the first moment Miss Larolles stopt for breath, said, "Pray what 
carries you to town, Miss Beverley, at this time of the year?"
Cecilia, whose thoughts had been wholly employed upon what would pass at her 
approaching meeting with Delvile, was so entirely unprepared for this question, 
that she could make to it no manner of answer, till Mr Gosport, in a tone of 
some surprise, repeated it, and then, not without hesitation, she said, "I have 
some business, Sir, in London,—pray how long have you been in the country?"
"Business, have you?" cried he, struck by her evasion; "and pray what can you 
and business have in common?"
"More than you may imagine," answered she, with greater steadiness; "and 
perhaps before long I may even have enough to teach me the enjoyment of 
leisure."
"Why you don't pretend to play my Lady Notable, and become your own steward?"
"And what can I do better?"
"What? Why seek one ready made to take the trouble off your hands. There are 
such creatures to be found, I promise you: beasts of burthen, who will freely 
undertake the management of your estate, for no other reward than the trifling 
one of possessing it. Can you no where meet with such an animal?"
"I don't know," answered she, laughing, "I have not been looking out."
"And have none such made application to you?"
"Why no,—I believe not."
"Fie, fie! no register-office keeper has been pestered with more claimants. You 
know they assault you by dozens."
"You must pardon me, indeed, I know not any such thing."
"You know, then, why they do not, and that is much the same."
"I may conjecture why, at least: the place, I suppose, is not worth the 
service."
"No, no; the place, they conclude, is already seized, and the fee—simple of 
the estate is the heart of the owner. Is it not so?"
"The heart of the owner," answered she, a little confused, "may, indeed, be 
simple, but not, perhaps, so easily seized as you imagine."
"Have you, then, wisely saved it from a storm, by a generous surrender? you 
have been, indeed, in an excellent school for the study both of attack and 
defence; Delvile-Castle is a fortress which, even in ruins, proves its strength 
by its antiquity: and it teaches, also, an admirable lesson, by displaying the 
dangerous, the infallible power of time, which defies all might, and undermines 
all strength; which breaks down every barrier, and shews nothing endurable but 
itself." Then looking at her with an arch earnestness, "I think," he added, 
"you made a long visit there; did this observation never occur to you? did you 
never perceive, never feel, rather, the insidious properties of time?"
"Yes, certainly," answered she, alarmed at the very mention of Delvile Castle, 
yet affecting to understand literally what was said metaphorically, "the havoc 
of time upon the place could not fail striking me."
"And was its havoc," said he, yet more archly, "merely external? is all within 
safe? sound and firm? and did the length of your residence shew its power by no 
new mischief?"
"Doubtless, not," answered she, with the same pretended ignorance, "the place 
is not in so desperate a condition as to exhibit any visible marks of decay in 
the course of three or four months."
"And, do you not know," cried he, "that the place to which I allude may receive 
a mischief in as many minutes which double the number of years cannot rectify? 
The internal parts of a building are not less vulnerable to accident than its 
outside; and though the evil may more easily be concealed, it will with greater 
difficulty be remedied. Many a fair structure have I seen, which, like that now 
before me" (looking with much significance at Cecilia), "has to the eye seemed 
perfect in all its parts, and unhurt either by time or casualty, while within, 
some lurking evil, some latent injury, has secretly worked its way into the 
very heart of the edifice, where it has consumed its strength, and laid waste 
its powers, till, sinking deeper and deeper, it has sapped its very foundation, 
before the superstructure has exhibited any token of danger. Is such an 
accident among the things you hold to be possible?"
"Your language," said she, colouring very high, "is so florid, that I must own 
it renders your meaning rather obscure."
"Shall I illustrate it by an example? Suppose, during your abode in Delvile 
Castle?"
"No, no," interrupted she, with involuntary quickness, "why should I trouble 
you to make illustrations?"
"O pray, my dear creature," cried Miss Larolles, "how is Mrs Harrel? I was 
never so sorry for any body in my life. I quite forgot to ask after her."
"Ay, poor Harrel!" cried Morrice, "he was a great loss to his friends. I had 
just begun to have a regard for him: we were growing extremely intimate. Poor 
fellow! he really gave most excellent dinners."
"Harrel?" suddenly exclaimed Mr Meadows, who seemed just then to first hear 
what was going forward, "who was he?"
"O, as good-natured a fellow as ever I knew in my life," answered Morrice; "he 
was never out of humour: he was drinking and singing and dancing to the very 
last moment. Don't you remember him, Sir, that night at Vauxhall?"
Mr Meadows made not any answer, but rode languidly on.
Morrice, ever more flippant than sagacious, called out, "I really believe the 
gentleman's deaf! he won't so much as say umph, and hay, now; but I'll give him 
such a hallow in his ears, as shall make him hear me, whether he will or no. 
Sir! I say!" bawling aloud, "have you forgot that night at Vauxhall?"
Mr Meadows, starting at being thus shouted at, looked towards Morrice with some 
surprise, and said, "Were you so obliging, Sir, as to speak to me?"
"Lord, yes, Sir," said Morrice, amazed; "I thought you had asked something 
about Mr Harrel, so I just made an answer to it;—that's all."
"Sir, you are very good," returned he, slightly bowing, and then looking 
another way, as if thoroughly satisfied with what had passed.
"But I say, Sir," resumed Morrice, "don't you remember how Mr Harrel"—
"Mr who, Sir?"
"Mr Harrel, Sir; was not you just now asking me who he was?"
"O, ay, true," cried Meadows, in a tone of extreme weariness, "I am. much 
obliged to you. Pray give my respects to him." And, touching his hat, he was 
riding away; but the astonished Morrice called out, "Your respects to him? why 
lord! Sir, don't you know he's dead?"
"Dead?—who, Sir?"
"Why Mr Harrel, Sir."
"Harrel?—O, very true," cried Meadows, with a face of sudden recollection; 
"he shot himself, I think, or was knocked down, or something of that sort. I 
remember it perfectly."
"O pray," cried Miss Larolles, "don't let's talk about it, it's the cruellest 
thing I ever knew in my life. I assure you I was so shocked, I thought I should 
never have got the better of it. I remember the next night at Ranelagh I could 
talk of nothing else. I dare say I told it to 500 people. I assure you I was 
tired to death; only conceive how distressing!"
"An excellent method," cried Mr Gosport, "to drive it out of your own head, by 
driving it into the heads of your neighbours! But were you not afraid, by such 
an ebullition of pathos, to burst as many hearts as you had auditors?"
"O I assure you," cried she, "every body was so excessive shocked you've no 
notion; one heard of nothing else; all the world was raving mad about it."
"Really yes," cried the Captain; "the subject was obsedé upon one partout. 
There was scarce any breathing for it: it poured from all directions; I must 
confess I was aneanti with it to a degree."
"But the most shocking thing in nature," cried Miss Larolles, "was going to the 
sale. I never missed a single day. One used to meet the whole world there, and 
every body was so sorry you can't conceive. It was quite horrid. I assure you I 
never suffered so much before; it made me so unhappy you can't imagine."
"That I am most ready to grant," said Mr Gosport, "be the powers of imagination 
ever so eccentric."
"Sir Robert Floyer and Mr Marriot," continued Miss Larolles, "have behaved so 
ill you've no idea, for they have done nothing ever since but say how 
monstrously Mr Harrel had cheated them, and how they lost such immense sums by 
him;—only conceive how ill-natured!"
"And they complain," cried Morrice, "that old Mr Delvile used them worse; for 
that when they had been defrauded of all that money on purpose to pay their 
addresses to Miss Beverley, he would never let them see her, but all of a 
sudden took her off into the country, on purpose to marry her to his own son."
The cheeks of Cecilia now glowed with the deepest blushes; but finding by a 
general silence that she was expected to make some answer, she said, with what 
unconcern she could assume, "They were very much mistaken; Mr Delvile had no 
such view."
"Indeed?" cried Mr Gosport, again perceiving her change of countenance; "and is 
it possible you have actually escaped a siege, while every body concluded you 
taken by assault? Pray where is young Delvile at present?"
"I don't—I can't tell, Sir."
"Is it long since you have seen him?"
"It is two months," answered she, with yet more hesitation, "since I was at 
Delvile Castle."
"O, but," cried Morrice, "did not you see him while he was in Suffolk? I 
believe, indeed, he is there now, for it was only yesterday I heard of his 
coming down, by a gentleman who called upon Lady Margaret, and told us he had 
seen a stranger, a day or two ago, at Mrs Charlton's door, and when he asked 
who he was, they told him his name was Delvile, and said he was on a visit at 
Mr Biddulph's."
Cecilia was quite confounded by this speech; to have it known that Delvile had 
visited her, was in itself alarming, but to have her own equivocation thus 
glaringly exposed, was infinitely more dangerous. The just suspicions to which 
it must give rise filled her with dread, and the palpable evasion in which she 
had been discovered, overwhelmed, her with confusion.
"So you had forgotten," said Mr Gosport, looking at her with much archness, 
"that you had seen him within the two months? but no wonder; for where is the 
lady who having so many admirers, can be at the trouble to remember which of 
them she saw last? or who, being so accustomed to adulation, can hold it worth 
while to enquire whence it comes? A thousand Mr Delviles are to Miss Beverley 
but as one; used from them all to the same tale, she regards them not 
individually as lovers, but collectively as men; and to gather, even from 
herself, which she is most inclined to favour, she must probably desire, like 
Portia in the Merchant of Venice, that their names may be run over one by one, 
before she can distinctly tell which is which."
The gallant gaiety of this speech was some relief to Cecilia, who was beginning 
a laughing reply, when Morrice called out, "That man looks as if he was upon 
the scout." And, raising her eyes, she perceived a man on horseback, who, 
though much muffled up, his hat flapped, and a handkerchief held to his mouth 
and chin, she instantly, by his air and figure, recognized to be Delvile.
In much consternation at this sight, she forgot what she meant to say, and 
dropping her eyes, walked silently on. Mr Gosport, attentive to her motions, 
looked from her to the horseman, and after a short examination, said, "I think 
I have seen that man before; have you, Miss Beverley?"
"Me?—no,"—answered she, "I believe not,—I hardly indeed, see him now."
"I have, I am pretty sure," said Morrice; "and if I could see his face, I dare 
say I should recollect him."
"He seems very willing to know if he can recollect any of us," said Mr Gosport, 
"and, if I am not mistaken, he sees much better than he is seen."
He was now come up to them, and though a glance sufficed to discover the object 
of his search, the sight of the party with which she was surrounded made him 
not dare stop or speak to her, and therefore, clapping spurs to his horse, he 
galloped past them.
"See," cried Morrice, looking after him, "how he turns round to examine us! I 
wonder who he is."
"Perhaps some highwayman!" cried Miss Larolles; "I assure you I am in a 
prodigious fright: I should hate to be robbed so you can't think."
"I was going to make much the same conjecture," said Mr Gosport, "and, if I am 
not greatly deceived, that man is a robber of no common sort. What think you, 
Miss Beverley, can you discern a thief in disguise?"
"No, indeed; I pretend to no such extraordinary knowledge."
"That's true; for all that you pretend to is extraordinary ignorance."
"I have a good mind," said Morrice, "to ride after him, and see what he is 
about."
"What for?" exclaimed Cecilia, greatly alarmed "there can certainly be no 
occasion!"
"No, pray don't," cried Miss Larolles, "for I assure you if he should come back 
to rob us, I should die upon the spot. Nothing could be so disagreeable I 
should scream so, you've no idea."
Morrice then gave up the proposal, and they walked quietly on; but Cecilia was 
extremely disturbed by this accident; she readily conjectured that, impatient 
for her arrival, Delvile had ridden that way, to see what had retarded her, and 
she was sensible that nothing could be so desirable as an immediate explanation 
of the motive of her journey. Such a meeting, therefore, had she been alone, 
was just what she could have wished, though, thus unluckily encompassed, it 
only added to her anxiety.
Involuntarily, however, she quickened her pace, through her eagerness to be 
relieved from so troublesome a party: but Miss Larolles, who was in no such 
haste, protested she could not keep up with her; saying, "You don't consider 
that I have got this sweet little dog to carry, and he is such a shocking 
plague to me you've no notion. Only conceive what a weight he is!"
"Pray, ma'am," cried Morrice, "let me take him for you; I'll be very careful of 
him, I promise you; and you need not be afraid to trust me, for I understand 
more about dogs than about any thing."
Miss Larolles, after many fond caresses, being really weary, consented, and 
Morrice placed the little animal before him on horseback: but while this matter 
was adjusting, and Miss Larolles was giving directions how she would have it 
held, Morrice exclaimed, "Look, look! that man is coming back! He is certainly 
watching us. There! now he's going off again!—I suppose he saw me remarking 
him."
"I dare say he's laying in wait to rob us," said Miss Larolles; "so when we 
turn off the high road, to go to Mrs Mears, I suppose he'll come galloping 
after us. It's excessive horrid, I assure you."
"'Tis a petrifying thing," said the captain, "that one must always be degouté 
by some wretched being or other of this sort; but pray be not deranged, I will 
ride after him, if you please, and do mon possible to get rid of him."
"Indeed I wish you would," answered Miss Larolles, "for I assure you he has put 
such shocking notions into my head, it's quite disagreeable."
"I shall make it a principle," said the captain, "to have the honour of obeying 
you." And was riding off, when Cecilia, in great agitation, called out "Why 
should you go, Sir?—he is not in our way,—pray let him alone,—for what 
purpose should you pursue him?"
"I hope," said Mr Gosport, "for the purpose of making him join our company, to 
some part of which I fancy he would be no very intolerable addition."
This speech again silenced Cecilia, who perceived, with the utmost confusion, 
that both Delvile and herself were undoubtedly suspected by Mr Gosport, if not 
already actually betrayed to him. She was obliged, therefore, to let the matter 
take its course, though quite sick with apprehension lest a full discovery 
should follow the projected pursuit.
The Captain, who wanted not courage, however deeply in vanity and affectation 
he had buried common sense, stood suspended, upon the request of Cecilia, that 
he would not go, and, with a shrug of distress, said, "Give me leave to own I 
am parfaitment in a state the most accablant in the world: nothing could give 
me greater pleasure than to profit of the occasion to accommodate either of 
these ladies; but as they proceed upon different principles, I am indecidé to 
a degree which way to turn myself!"
"Put it to the vote, then," said Morrice; "the two ladies have both spoke; now, 
then, for the gentlemen. Come, Sir," to Mr Gosport, "what say you?"
"O, fetch the culprit back, by all means," answered he; "and then let us all 
insist upon his opening his cause, by telling us in what he has offended us; 
for there is no part of his business, I believe, with which we are less 
acquainted."
"Well," said Morrice, "I'm for asking him a few questions too; so is the 
Captain; so every body has spoke but you, Sir," addressing himself to Mr 
Meadows, "So now, Sir, let's hear your opinion."
Mr Meadows, appearing wholly inattentive, rode on.
"Why, Sir, I say!" cried Morrice, louder, "we are all waiting for your vote. 
Pray what is the gentleman's name? it's deuced hard to make him hear one."
"His name is Meadows," said Miss Larolles, in a low voice, "and I assure you 
sometimes he won't hear people by the hour together. He's so excessive absent 
you've no notion. One day he made me so mad, that I could not help crying; and 
Mr Sawyer was standing by the whole time! and I assure you I believe he laughed 
at me. Only conceive how distressing!"
"May be," said Morrice, "it's out of bashfulness perhaps he thinks we shall cut 
him up."
"Bashfulness," repeated Miss Larolles; "Lord, you don't conceive the thing at 
all. Why he's at the very head of the ton. There's nothing in the world so 
fashionable as taking no notice of things, and never seeing people, and saying 
nothing at all, and never hearing a word, and not knowing one's own 
acquaintance. All the ton people do so, and I assure you as to Mr Meadows, he's 
so excessively courted by every body, that if he does but say a syllable, he 
thinks it such an immense favour, you've no idea."
This account, however little alluring in itself, of his celebrity, was yet 
sufficient to make Morrice covet his further acquaintance: for Morrice was ever 
attentive to turn his pleasure to his profit, and never negligent of his 
interest, but when ignorant how to pursue it. He returned, therefore, to the 
charge, though by no means with the same freedom he had begun it, and lowering 
his voice to a tone of respect and submission, he said, "Pray, Sir, may we take 
the liberty to ask your advice, whether we shall go on, or take a turn back?"
Mr Meadows made not any answer; but when Morrice was going to repeat his 
question, without appearing even to know that he was near him, he abruptly said 
to Miss Larolles, "Pray what is become of Mrs Mears? I don't see her amongst 
us."
"Lord, Mr Meadows," exclaimed she, "how can you be so odd? Don't you remember 
she went on in a chaise to the inn?"
"O, ay, true," cried he; "I protest I had quite forgot it; I beg your pardon, 
indeed. Yes, I recollect now,—she fell off her horse."
"Her horse? Why you know she was in her chaise."
"Her chaise, was it?—ay, true, so it was. Poor thing!—I am glad she was not 
hurt."
"Not hurt? Why she's so excessively bruised, she can't stir a step! Only 
conceive what a memory you've got!"
"I am most extremely sorry for her indeed," cried he, again stretching himself 
and yawning; "poor soul!—I hope she won't die. Do you think she will!"
"Die!" repeated Miss Larolles, with a scream, "Lord, how shocking! You are 
really enough to frighten one to hear you."
"But, Sir," said Morrice, "I wish you would be so kind as to give us your vote; 
the man will else be gone so far, we sha'n't be able to overtake him.—Though 
I do really believe that is the very fellow coming back to peep at us again!"
"I am ennuyé to a degree," cried the Captain; "he is certainly set upon us as 
a spy, and I must really beg leave to enquire of him upon what principle he 
incommodes us."—And instantly he rode after him.
"And so will I too," cried Morrice, following.
Miss Larolles screamed after him to give her first her little dog; but with a 
schoolboy's eagerness to be foremost, he galloped on without heeding her.
The uneasiness of Cecilia now encreased every moment; the discovery of Delvile 
seemed unavoidable, and his impatient and indiscreet watchfulness must have 
rendered the motives of his disguise but too glaring. All she had left to hope 
was arriving at the inn before the detection was announced, and at least saving 
herself the cruel mortification of hearing the raillery which would follow it.
Even this, however, was not allowed her; Miss Larolles, whom she had no means 
to quit, hardly stirred another step, from her anxiety for her dog, and the 
earnestness of her curiosity about the stranger. She loitered, stopt now to 
talk, and now to listen, and was scarce moved a yard from the spot where she 
had been left, when the Captain and Morrice returned.
"We could not for our lives overtake the fellow," said Morrice; "he was well 
mounted, I promise you, and I'll warrant he knows what he's about, for he 
turned off so short at a place where there were two narrow lanes, that we could 
not make out which way he went."
Cecilia, relieved and delighted by this unexpected escape, now recovered her 
composure, and was content to saunter on without repining.
"But though we could not seize his person," said the Captain, "we have 
debarrassed ourselves tout à fait from his pursuit; I hope, therefore, Miss 
Larolles will make a revoke of her apprehensions."
The answer to this was nothing but a loud scream, with an exclamation, "Lord, 
where's my dog?"
"Your dog!" cried Morrice, looking aghast, "good stars! I never thought of him!"
"How excessive barbarous!" cried Miss Larolles, "you've killed him, I dare say. 
Only think how shocking! I had rather have seen any body served so in the 
world. I shall never forgive it, I assure you."
"Lord, ma'am," said Morrice, "how can you suppose I've killed him? Poor, pretty 
creature, I'm sure I liked him prodigiously. I can't think for my life where he 
can be: but I have a notion he must have dropt down some where while I happened 
to be on the full gallop. I'll go look [for] him, however, for we went at such 
a rate that I never missed him."
Away again rode Morrice.
"I am abimé to the greatest degree," said the Captain, "that the poor little 
sweet fellow should be lost if I had thought him in any danger, I would have 
made it a principle to have had a regard to his person myself. Will you give me 
leave, ma'am, to have the honour of seeking him partout?"
"O, I wish you would with all my heart; for I assure you if I don't find him, I 
shall think it so excessive distressing you can't conceive."
The Captain touched his hat, and was gone.
These repeated impediments almost robbed Cecilia of all patience; yet her total 
inability of resistance obliged her to submit, and compelled her to go, stop, 
or turn, according to their own motions.
"Now if Mr Meadows had the least good-nature in the world," said Miss Larolles, 
"he would offer to help us; but he's so excessive odd, that I believe if we 
were all of us to fall down and break our necks, he would be so absent he would 
hardly take the trouble to ask us how we did."
"Why in so desperate a case," said Mr Gosport, "the trouble would be rather 
superfluous. However, don't repine that one of the cavaliers stays with us by 
way of guard, lest your friend the spy should take us by surprize while our 
troop is dispersed."
"O Lord," cried Miss Larolles, "now you put it in my head, I dare say that 
wretch has got my dog! only think how horrid!"
"I saw plainly," said Mr Gosport, looking significantly at Cecilia, "that he 
was feloniously inclined, though I must confess I took him not for a 
dog-stealer."
Miss Larolles then, running up to Mr Meadows, called out, "I have a prodigious 
immense favour to ask of you, Mr Meadows."
"Ma'am!" cried Mr Meadows, with his usual start.
"It's only to know, whether if that horrid creature should come back, you could 
not just ride up to him and shoot him, before he gets to us? Now will you 
promise me to do it?"
"You are vastly good," said he, with a vacant smile; "what a charming evening! 
Do you love the country?"
"Yes, vastly; only I'm so monstrously tired, I can hardly stir a step. Do you 
like it?"
"The country? O no! I detest it! Dusty hedges, and chirping sparrows! 'Tis 
amazing to me any body can exist upon such terms."
"I assure you," cried Miss Larolles, "I'm quite of your opinion. I hate the 
country so you've no notion. I wish with all my heart it was all under ground. 
I declare, when I first go into it for the summer, I cry so you can't think. I 
like nothing but London.—Don't you?"
"London!" repeated Mr Meadows, "O melancholy! the sink of all vice and 
depravity. Streets without light! Houses without air! Neighbourhood without 
society! Talkers without listeners!—'Tis astonishing any rational being can 
endure to be so miserably immured."
"Lord, Mr Meadows," cried she, angrily, "I believe you would have one live no 
where!"
"True, very true, ma'am," said he, yawning, "one really lives no where; one 
does but vegetate, and wish it all at an end. Don't you find it so, ma'am?"
"Me? no indeed; I assure you I like living of all things. Whenever I'm ill, I'm 
in such a fright you've no idea. I always think I'm going to die, and it puts 
me so out of spirits you can't think. Does not it you, too?"
Here Mr Meadows, looking another way, began to whistle.
"Lord," cried Miss Larolles, "how excessive distressing! to ask one questions, 
and then never hear what one answers!"
Here the Captain returned alone; and Miss Larolles, flying to meet him, 
demanded where was her dog?
"I have the malbeur to assure you," answered he, "that I never was more aneanti 
in my life! the pretty little fellow has broke another leg!"
Miss Larolles, in a passion of grief, then declared she was certain that 
Morrice had maimed him thus on purpose, and desired to know where the vile 
wretch was?
"He was so much discomposed at the incident," replied the Captain, "that he 
rode instantly another way. I took up the pretty fellow therefore myself, and 
have done mon possible not to derange him."
The unfortunate little animal was then delivered to Miss Larolles; and after 
much lamentation, they at length continued their walk; and, without further 
adventure, arrived at the inn.






BOOK VIII.






