
Scarce less unhappy in her decision than in her uncertainty, and every way 
dissatisfied with her situation, her views and herself, Cecilia was still so 
distressed and uncomfortable, when Delvile called the next morning, that he 
could not discover what her determination had been, and fearfully enquired his 
doom with hardly any hope of finding favour.
But Cecilia was above affectation, and a stranger to art. "I would not, Sir," 
she said, "keep you an instant in suspense, when I am no longer in suspense 
myself. I may have appeared trifling, but I have been nothing less, and you 
would readily exculpate me of caprice, if half the distress of my irresolution 
was known to you. Even now, when I hesitate no more, my mind is so ill at ease, 
that I could neither wonder nor be displeased should you hesitate in your turn."
"You hesitate no more?" cried he, almost breathless at the sound of those 
words, "and is it possible—Oh my Cecilia!—is it possible your resolution is 
in my favour?"
"Alas!" cried she, "how little is your reason to rejoice! a dejected and 
melancholy gift is all you can receive!"
"Ere I take it, then," cried he, in a voice that spoke joy; pain, and fear all 
at once in commotion, "tell me if your reluctance has its origin in me, that I 
may rather even yet relinquish you, than merely owe your hand to the 
selfishness of persecution?"
"Your pride," said she, half smiling, "has some right to be alarmed, though I 
meant not to alarm it. No! it is with myself only I am at variance, with my own 
weakness and want of judgment that I quarrel,—in you I have all the reliance 
that the highest opinion of your honour and integrity can give me."
This was enough for the warm heart of Delvile, not only to restore peace, but 
to awaken rapture. He was almost as wild with delight, as he had before been 
with apprehension, and poured forth his acknowledgments with so much fervour of 
gratitude, that Cecilia imperceptibly grew reconciled to herself, and before 
she missed her dejection, participated in his contentment.
She quitted him as soon as she had power, to acquaint Mrs Charlton with what 
had passed, and assist in preparing her to accompany them to the altar; while 
Delvile flew to his new acquaintance, Mr Singleton, the lawyer, to request him 
to supply the place of Mr Monckton in giving her away.
All was now hastened with the utmost expedition, and to avoid observation, they 
agreed to meet at the church; their desire of secrecy, however potent, never 
urging them to wish the ceremony should be performed in a place less awful.
When the chairs, however, came, which were to carry the two ladies thither, 
Cecilia trembled and hung back. The greatness of her undertaking, the hazard of 
all her future happiness, the disgraceful secrecy of her conduct, the expected 
reproaches of Mrs Delvile, and the boldness and indelicacy of the step she was 
about to take, all so forcibly struck, and so painfully wounded her, that the 
moment she was summoned to set out, she again lost her resolution, and 
regretting the hour that ever Delvile was known to her, she sunk into a chair, 
and gave up her whole soul to anguish and sorrow.
The good Mrs Charlton tried in vain to console her; a sudden horror against 
herself had now seized her spirits, which, exhausted by long struggles, could 
rally no more.
In this situation she was at length surprised by Delvile, whose uneasy 
astonishment that she had failed in her appointment, was only to be equalled by 
that with which he was struck at the sight of her tears. He demanded the cause 
with the utmost tenderness and apprehension; Cecilia for some time could not 
speak, and then, with a deep sigh, "Ah!" she cried, "Mr Delvile! how weak are 
we all when unsupported by our own esteem! how feeble, how inconsistent, how 
changeable, when our courage has any foundation but duty!"
Delvile, much relieved by finding her sadness sprung not from any new 
affliction, gently reproached her breach of promise, and earnestly entreated 
her to repair it. "The clergyman," cried he, "is waiting; I have left him with 
Mr Singleton in the vestry; no new objections have started, and no new 
obstacles have intervened; why, then, torment ourselves with discussing again 
the old ones, which we have already considered till every possible argument 
upon them is exhausted? Tranquillize, I conjure you, your agitated spirits, and 
if the truest tenderness, the most animated esteem, and the gratefullest 
admiration, can soften your future cares, and ensure your future peace, every 
anniversary of this day will recompense my Cecilia for every pang she now 
suffers!"
Cecilia, half soothed and half ashamed, finding she had in fact nothing new to 
say or to object, compelled herself to rise, and, penetrated by his 
solicitations, endeavoured to compose her mind, and promised to follow him.
He would not trust her, however, from his sight, but seizing the very instant 
of her renewed consent, he dismissed the chairs, and ordering a hackney-coach, 
preferred any risk to that of her again wavering, and insisted upon 
accompanying her in it himself.
Cecilia had now scarce time to breathe, before she found herself at the porch 
of——church. Delvile hurried her out of the carriage, and then offered his 
arm to Mrs Charlton. Not a word was spoken by any of the party till they went 
into the vestry, where Delvile ordered Cecilia a glass of water, and having 
hastily made his compliments to the clergyman, gave her hand to Mr Singleton, 
who led her to the altar.
The ceremony was now begun; and Cecilia, finding herself past all power of 
retracting, soon called her thoughts from wishing it, and turned her whole 
attention to the awful service; to which though she listened with reverence, 
her full satisfaction in the object of her vows, made her listen without 
terror. But when the priest came to that solemn adjuration, If any man can shew 
any just cause why they may not lawfully be joined together, a conscious tear 
stole into her eye, and a sigh escaped from Delvile that went to her heart: 
but, when the priest concluded the exhortation with let him now speak, or else 
hereafter for-ever hold his peace, a female voice at some distance, called out 
in shrill accents, "I do!"
The ceremony was instantly stopt. The astonished priest immediately shut up the 
book to regard the intended bride and bridegroom; Delvile started with 
amazement to see whence the sound proceeded; and Cecilia, aghast, and struck 
with horror, faintly shriekt, and caught hold of Mrs Charlton.
The consternation was general, and general was the silence, though all of one 
accord turned round towards the place whence the voice issued: a female form at 
the same moment was seen rushing from a pew, who glided out of the church with 
the quickness of lightning.
Not a word was yet uttered, every one seeming rooted to the spot on which he 
stood, and regarding in mute wonder the place this form had crossed.
Delvile at length exclaimed, "What can this mean?"
"Did you not know the woman, Sir?" said the clergyman.
"No, Sir, I did not even see her."
"Nor you, madam?" said he, addressing Cecilia.
"No, Sir," she answered, in a voice that scarce articulated the two syllables, 
and changing colour so frequently, that Delvile, apprehensive she would faint, 
flew to her, calling out, "Let me support you!"
She turned from him hastily, and still, holding by Mrs Charlton, moved away 
from the altar.
"Whither," cried Delvile, fearfully following her, "whither are you going?"
She made not any answer; but still, though tottering as much from emotion as 
Mrs Charlton from infirmity, she walked on.
"Why did you stop the ceremony, Sir?" cried Delvile, impatiently speaking to 
the clergyman.
"No ceremony, Sir," he returned, "could proceed with such an interruption."
"It has been wholly accidental," cried he, "for we neither of us know the 
woman, who could not have any right or authority for the prohibition." Then yet 
more anxiously pursuing Cecilia, "why," he continued, "do you thus move 
off?—Why leave the ceremony unfinished?—Mrs Charlton, what is it you are 
about?—Cecilia, I beseech you return, and let the service go on!"
Cecilia, making a motion with her hand to forbid his following her, still 
silently proceeded, though drawing along with equal difficulty Mrs Charlton and 
herself.
"This is insupportable!" cried Delvile, with vehemence, "turn, I conjure 
you!—my Cecilia!—my wife!—why is it you thus abandon me?—Turn, I 
implore you, and receive my eternal vows!—Mrs Charlton, bring her 
back,—Cecilia, you must not go!—"
He now attempted to take her hand, but shrinking from his touch, in an emphatic 
but low voice, she said, "Yes, Sir, I must!—an interdiction such as 
this!—for the world could I not brave it!"
She then made an effort to somewhat quicken her pace.
"Where," cried Delvile, half frantic, "where is this infamous woman? This 
wretch who has thus wantonly destroyed me!"
And he rushed out of the church in pursuit of her.
The clergyman and Mr Singleton, who had hitherto been wondering spectators, 
came now to offer their assistance to Cecilia. She declined any help for 
herself, but gladly accepted their services for Mrs Charlton, who, 
thunderstruck by all that had past, seemed almost robbed of her faculties. Mr 
Singleton proposed calling a hackney coach, she consented, and they stopt for 
it at the church porch.
The clergyman now began to enquire of the pew-opener, what she knew of the 
woman, who she was, and how she had got into the church? She knew of her, she 
answered, nothing, but that she had come in to early prayers, and she supposed 
she had hid herself in a pew when they were over, as she had thought the church 
entirely empty.
An hackney coach now drew up, and while the gentlemen were assisting Mrs 
Charlton into it, Delvile returned.
"I have pursued and enquired," cried he, "in vain, I can neither discover nor 
hear of her.—But what is all this? Whither are you going?—What does this 
coach do here?—Mrs Charlton, why do you get into it?—Cecilia, what are you 
doing?"
Cecilia turned away from him in silence. The shock she had received, took from 
her all power of speech, while amazement and terror deprived her even of relief 
from tears. She believed Delvile to blame, though she knew not in what, but the 
obscurity of her fears served only to render them more dreadful.
She was now getting into the coach herself, but Delvile, who could neither 
brook her displeasure, nor endure her departure, forcibly caught her hand, and 
called out, "You are mine, you are my wife!—I will part with you no more, and 
go whithersoever you will, I will follow and claim you!"
"Stop me not!" cried she, impatiently though faintly, "I am sick, I am ill 
already,—if you detain me any longer, I shall be unable to support myself!"
"Oh then rest on me!" cried he, still holding her; "rest but upon me till the 
ceremony is over!—you will drive me to despair and to madness if you leave me 
in this barbarous manner!"
A crowd now began to gather, and the words bride and bridegroom reached the 
ears of Cecilia; who half dead with shame, with fear, and with distress, 
hastily said "You are determined to make me miserable!" and snatching away her 
hand, which Delvile at those words could no longer hold, she threw herself into 
the carriage.
Delvile, however, jumped in after her, and with an air of authority ordered the 
coachman to Pall-Mall, and then drew up the glasses, with a look of fierceness 
at the mob.
Cecilia had neither spirits nor power to resist him; yet, offended by his 
violence, and shocked to be thus publickly pursued by him, her looks spoke a 
resentment far more mortifying than any verbal reproach.
"Inhuman Cecilia!" cried he, passionately, "to desert me at the very 
altar!—to cast me off at the instant the most sacred rites were uniting 
us!—and then thus to look at me!—to treat me with this disdain at a time of 
such distraction!—to scorn me thus injuriously at the moment you unjustly 
abandon me!"
"To how dreadful a scene," said Cecilia, recovering from her consternation, 
"have you exposed me! to what shame, what indignity, what irreparable disgrace!"
"Oh heaven!" cried he with horror, "if any crime, any offence of mine has 
occasioned this fatal blow, the whole world holds not a wretch so culpable as 
myself, nor one who will sooner allow the justice of your rigour! my veneration 
for you has ever equalled my affection, and could I think it was through me you 
have suffered any indignity, I should soon abhor myself, as you seem to abhor 
me. But what is it I have done? How have I thus incensed you? By what action, 
by what guilt, have I incurred this displeasure?
"Whence," cried she, "came that voice which still vibrates in my ear? The 
prohibition could not be on my account, since none to whom I am known have 
either right or interest in even wishing it."
"What an inference is this! over me, then, do you conclude this woman had any 
power?"
Here they stopt at the lodgings. Delvile handed both the ladies out. Cecilia, 
eager to avoid his importunities, and dreadfully disturbed, hastily past him, 
and ran up stairs; but Mrs Charlton refused not his arm, on which she lent till 
they reached the drawing-room.
Cecilia then rang the bell for her servant, and gave orders that a post-chaise 
might be sent for immediately.
Delvile now felt offended in his turn; but suppressing his vehemence, he 
gravely and quietly said "Determined as you are to leave me, indifferent to my 
peace, and incredulous of my word, deign, at least, before we part, to be more 
explicit in your accusation, and tell me if indeed it is possible you can 
suspect that the wretch who broke off the ceremony, had ever from me received 
provocation for such an action?"
"I know not what to suspect," said Cecilia, "where every thing is thus involved 
in obscurity; but I must own I should have some difficulty to think those words 
the effect of chance, or to credit that their speaker was concealed without 
design."
"You are right, then, madam," cried he, resentfully, "to discard me! to treat 
me with contempt, to banish me without repugnance, since I see you believe me 
capable of duplicity, and imagine I am better informed in this affair than I 
appear to be. You have said I shall make you miserable,—no, madam, no! your 
happiness and misery depend not upon one you hold so worthless!"
"On whatever they depend," said Cecilia, "I am too little at ease for 
discussion. I would no more be daring than superstitious, but none of our 
proceedings have prospered, and since their privacy has always been contrary 
both to my judgment and my principles, I know not how to repine at a failure I 
cannot think unmerited. Mrs Charlton, our chaise is coming; you will be ready, 
I hope, to set off in it directly?"
Delvile, too angry to trust himself to speak, now walked about the room, and 
endeavoured to calm himself; but so little was his success, that though silent 
till the chaise was announced, when he heard that dreaded sound, and saw 
Cecilia steady in her purpose of departing, he was so much shocked and 
afflicted, that, clasping his hands in a transport of passion and grief, he 
exclaimed. "This, then, Cecilia, is your faith! this is the felicity you bid me 
hope! this is the recompense of my sufferings, and the performing of your 
engagement!"
Cecilia, struck by these reproaches, turned back; but while she hesitated how 
to answer them, he went on, "You are insensible to my misery, and impenetrable 
to my entreaties; a secret enemy has had power to make me odious in your sight, 
though for her enmity I can assign no cause, though even her existence was this 
morning unknown to me! Ever ready to abandon, and most willing to condemn me, 
you have more confidence in a vague conjecture, than in all you have observed 
of the whole tenour of my character. Without knowing why, you are disposed to 
believe me criminal, without deigning to say wherefore, you are eager to banish 
me your presence. Yet scarce could a consciousness of guilt itself, wound me so 
forcibly, so keenly, as your suspecting I am guilty!"
"Again, then," cried Cecilia, "shall I subject myself to a scene of such 
disgrace and horror? No, never!—The punishment of my error shall at least 
secure its reformation. Yet if I merit your reproaches, I deserve not your 
regard; cease, therefore, to profess any for me, or make them no more."
"Shew but to them," cried he, "the smallest sensibility, shew but for me the 
most distant concern, and I will try to bear my disappointment without 
murmuring, and submit to your decrees as to those from which there is no 
appeal: but to wound without deigning even to look at what you destroy,—to 
shoot at random those arrows that are pointed with poison,—to see them fasten 
on the heart, and corrode its vital functions, yet look on without compunction, 
or turn away with cold disdain,—Oh where is the candour I thought lodged in 
Cecilia! where the justice, the equity, I believed a part of herself!"
"After all that has past," said Cecilia, sensibly touched by his distress, "I 
expected not these complaints, nor that, from me, any assurances would be 
wanted; yet, if it will quiet your mind, if it will better reconcile you to our 
separation—-"
"Oh fatal prelude!" interrupted he, "what on earth can quiet my mind that leads 
to our separation?—Give to me no condescension with any such view,—preserve 
your indifference, persevere in your coldness, triumph still in your power of 
inspiring those feelings you can never return,—all, every thing is more 
supportable than to talk of our separation!"
"Yet how," cried she, "parted, torn asunder as we have been, how is it now to 
be avoided?"
"Trust in my honour! Shew me but the confidence which I will venture to say I 
deserve, and then will that union no longer be impeded, which in future, I am 
certain, will never be repented!"
"Good heaven, what a request! faith so implicit would be frenzy."
"You doubt, then, my integrity? You suspect—-"
"Indeed I do not; yet in a case of such importance, what ought to guide me but 
my own reason, my own conscience, my own sense of right? Pain me not, 
therefore, with reproaches, distress me no more with entreaties, when I 
solemnly declare that no earthly consideration shall ever again make me promise 
you my hand, while the terror of Mrs Delvile's displeasure has possession of my 
heart. And now adieu."
"You give me, then, up?"
"Be patient, I beseech you; and attempt not to follow me; 'tis a step I cannot 
permit."
"Not follow you? And who has power to prevent me?"
"I have, Sir, if to incur my endless resentment is of any consequence to you."
She then, with an air of determined steadiness, moved on; Mrs Charlton, 
assisted by the servants, being already upon the stairs.
"O tyranny!" cried he, "what submission is it you exact!—May I not even 
enquire into the dreadful mystery of this morning?"
"Yes, certainly."
"And may I not acquaint you with it, should it be discovered?"
"I shall not be sorry to hear it. Adieu."
She was now half way down the stairs; when, losing all forbearance, he hastily 
flew after her, and endeavouring to stop her, called out, "If you do not hate 
and detest me,—if I am not loathsome and abhorrent to you, O quit me not thus 
insensibly!—Cecilia! my beloved Cecilia!—speak to me, at least, one word of 
less severity! Look at me once more, and tell me we part not for-ever!"
Cecilia then turned round, and while a starting tear shewed her sympathetic 
distress, said, "Why will you thus oppress me with entreaties I ought not to 
gratify?—Have I not accompanied you to the altar,—and can you doubt what I 
have thought of you?"
"Have thought?—Oh Cecilia!—is it then all over?"
"Pray suffer me to go quietly, and fear not I shall go too happily! Suppress 
your own feelings, rather than seek to awaken mine. Alas! there is little 
occasion!—Oh Mr Delvile! were our connection opposed by no duty, and 
repugnant to no friends, were it attended by no impropriety, and carried on 
with no necessity of disguise,—you would not thus charge me with 
indifference, you would not suspect me of insensibility,—Oh no! the choice of 
my heart would then be its glory, and all I now blush to feel, I should openly 
and with pride acknowledge!"
She then hurried to the chaise, Delvile pursuing her with thanks and blessings, 
and gratefully assuring her, as he handed her into it, that he would obey all 
her injunctions, and not even attempt to see her, till he could bring her some 
intelligence concerning the morning's transaction.
The chaise then drove off.





