
The journey was melancholy and tedious: Mrs Charlton, extremely fatigued by the 
unusual hurry and exercise both of mind and body which she had lately gone 
through, was obliged to travel very slowly, and to lie upon the road. Cecilia, 
however, was in no haste to proceed: she was going to no one she wished to see, 
she was wholly without expectation of meeting with any thing that could give 
her pleasure. The unfortunate expedition in which she had been engaged, left 
her now nothing but regret, and only promised her in future sorrow and 
mortification.
Mrs Charlton, after her return home, still continued ill, and Cecilia, who 
constantly attended her, had the additional affliction of imputing her 
indisposition to herself. Every thing she thought conspired to punish the error 
she had committed; her proceedings were discovered, though her motives were 
unknown; the Delvile family could not fail to hear of her enterprize, and while 
they attributed it to her temerity, they would exult in its failure: but 
chiefly hung upon her mind the unaccountable prohibition of her marriage. 
Whence that could proceed she was wholly without ability to divine, yet her 
surmizes were not more fruitless than various. At one moment she imagined it 
some frolic of Morrice, at another some perfidy of Monckton, and at another an 
idle and unmeaning trick of some stranger to them all. But none of these 
suppositions carried with them any air of probability; Morrice, even if he had 
watched their motions and pursued them to the church, which his inquisitive 
impertinence made by no means impossible, could yet hardly have either time or 
opportunity to engage any woman in so extraordinary an undertaking; Mr 
Monckton, however averse to the connection, she considered as a man of too much 
honour to break it off in a manner so alarming and disgraceful; and mischief so 
wanton in any stranger, seemed to require a share of unfeeling effrontery, 
which could fall to the lot of so few as to make this suggestion unnatural and 
incredible.
Sometimes she imagined that Delvile might formerly have been affianced to some 
woman, who having accidentally discovered his intentions, took this desperate 
method of rendering them abortive: but this was a short-lived thought, and 
speedily gave way to her esteem for his general character, and her confidence 
in the firmness of his probity.
All, therefore, was dark and mysterious; conjecture was baffled, and meditation 
was useless. Her opinions were unfixed, and her heart was miserable; she could 
only be steady in believing Delvile as unhappy as herself, and only find 
consolation in believing him, also, as blameless.
Three days passed thus, without incident or intelligence; her time wholly 
occupied in attending Mrs Charlton; her thoughts all engrossed upon her own 
situation: but upon the fourth day she was informed that a lady was in the 
parlour, who desired to speak with her.
She presently went down stairs,—and, upon entering the room, perceived Mrs 
Delvile!
Seized with astonishment and fear, she stopt short, and, looking aghast, held 
by the door, robbed of all power to receive so unexpected and unwelcome a 
visitor, by an internal sensation of guilt, mingled with a dread of discovery 
and reproach.
Mrs Delvile, addressing her with the coldest politeness, said, "I fear I have 
surprised you; I am sorry I had not time to acquaint you of my intention to 
wait upon you."
Cecilia then, moving from the door, faintly answered, "I cannot, madam, but be 
honoured by your notice, whenever you are pleased to confer it."
They then sat down; Mrs Delvile preserving an air the most formal and distant, 
and Cecilia half sinking with apprehensive dismay.
After a short and ill-boding silence, "I mean not," said Mrs Delvile, "to 
embarrass or distress you; I will not, therefore, keep you in suspense of the 
purport of my visit. I come not to make enquiries, I come not to put your 
sincerity to any trial, nor to torture your delicacy; I dispense with all 
explanation, for I have not one doubt to solve: I know what has passed, I know 
that my son loves you."
Not all her secret alarm, nor all the perturbation of her fears, had taught 
Cecilia to expect so direct an attack, nor enabled her to bear the shock of it 
with any composure: she could not speak, she could not look at Mrs Delvile; she 
arose, and walked to the window, without knowing what she was doing.
Here, however, her distress was not likely to diminish; for the first sight she 
saw was Fidel, who barked, and jumped up at the window to lick her hands.
"Good God! Fidel here!" exclaimed Mrs Delvile, amazed.
Cecilia, totally overpowered, covered her glowing face with both her hands, and 
sunk into a chair.
Mrs Delvile for a few minutes was silent; and then, following her, said, 
"Imagine not I am making any discovery, nor suspect me of any design to develop 
your sentiments. That Mortimer could love in vain I never, believed; that Miss 
Beverley, possessing so much merit, could be blind to it in another, I never 
thought possible. I mean not, therefore, to solicit any account or explanation, 
but merely to beg your patience while I talk to you myself, and your permission 
to speak to you with openness and truth."
Cecilia, though relieved by this calmness from all apprehension of reproach, 
found in her manner a coldness that convinced her of the loss of her affection, 
and in the introduction to her business a solemnity that assured her what she 
should decree would be unalterable. She uncovered her face to shew her 
respectful attention, but she could not raise it up, and could not utter a word.
Mrs Delvile then seated herself next her, and gravely continued her discourse.
"Miss Beverley, however little acquainted with the state of our family affairs, 
can scarcely have been uninformed that a fortune such as hers seems almost all 
that family can desire; nor can she have failed to observe, that her merit and 
accomplishments have no where been more felt and admired: the choice therefore 
of Mortimer she could not doubt would have our sanction, and when she honoured 
his proposals with her favour, she might naturally conclude she gave happiness 
and pleasure to all his friends."
Cecilia, superior to accepting a palliation of which she felt herself 
undeserving, now lifted up her head, and forcing herself to speak, said "No, 
madam, I will not deceive you, for I have never been deceived myself: I 
presumed not to expect your approbation,—though in missing it I have for ever 
lost my own!"
"Has Mortimer, then," cried she with eagerness, "been strictly honourable? has 
he neither beguiled nor betrayed you?"
"No, madam," said she, blushing, "I have nothing to reproach him with."
"Then he is indeed my son!" cried Mrs Delvile, with emotion; "had he been 
treacherous to you, while disobedient to us, I had indisputably renounced him."
Cecilia, who now seemed the only culprit, felt herself in a state of 
humiliation not to be borne; she collected, therefore, all her courage, and 
said, "I have cleared Mr Delvile; permit me, madam, now, to say something for 
myself."
"Certainly; you cannot oblige me more than by speaking without disguise."
"It is not in the hope of regaining your good opinion,—that, I see, is 
lost!—but merely—"
"No, not lost," said Mrs Delvile, "but if once it was yet higher, the fault was 
my own, in indulging an expectation of perfection to which human nature is 
perhaps unequal."
Ah, then, thought Cecilia, all is over! the contempt I so much feared is 
incurred, and though it may be softened, it can never be removed!
"Speak, then, and with sincerity," she continued, "all you wish me to hear, and 
then grant me your attention in return to the purpose of my present journey."
"I have little, madam," answered the depressed Cecilia, "to say; you tell me 
you already know all that has past; I will not, therefore, pretend to take any 
merit from revealing it: I will only add, that my consent to this transaction 
has made me miserable almost from the moment I gave it; that I meant and wished 
to retract as soon as reflection pointed out to me my error, and that 
circumstances the most perverse, not blindness to propriety, nor stubbornness 
in wrong, led me to make, at last, that fatal attempt, of which the 
recollection, to my last hour, must fill me with regret and shame."
"I wonder not," said Mrs Delvile, "that in a situation where delicacy was so 
much less requisite than courage, Miss Beverley should feel herself distressed 
and unhappy. A mind such as hers could never err with impunity; and it is 
solely from a certainty of her innate sense of right, that I venture to wait 
upon her now, and that I have any hope to influence her upon whose influence 
alone our whole family must in future depend. Shall I now proceed, or is there 
any thing you wish to say first?"
"No, madam, nothing."
"Hear me, then, I beg of you, with no predetermination to disregard me, but 
with an equitable resolution to attend to reason, and a candour that leaves an 
opening to conviction. Not easy, indeed, is such a task, to a mind pre-occupied 
with an intention to be guided by the dictates of inclination,—-"
"You wrong me, indeed, madam!" interrupted Cecilia, greatly hurt, "my mind 
harbours no such intention, it has no desire but to be guided by duty, it is 
wretched with a consciousness of having failed in it! I pine, I sicken to 
recover my own good opinion; I should then no longer feel unworthy of yours; 
and whether or not I might be able to regain it, I should at least lose this 
cruel depression that now sinks me in your presence!"
"To regain it," said Mrs Delvile, "were to exercise but half your power, which 
at this moment enables you, if such is your wish, to make me think of you more 
highly than one human being ever thought of another. Do you condescend to hold 
this worth your while?"
Cecilia started at the question; her heart beat quick with struggling passions; 
she saw the sacrifice which was to be required, and her pride, her affronted 
pride, arose high to anticipate the rejection; but the design was combated by 
her affections, which opposed the indignant rashness, and told her that one 
hasty speech might separate her from Delvile for ever. When this painful 
conflict was over, of which Mrs Delvile patiently waited the issue, she 
answered, with much hesitation, "To regain your good opinion, madam, greatly, 
truly as I value it,—is what I now scarcely dare hope."
"Say not so," cried she, "since, if you hope, you cannot miss it. I purpose to 
point out to you the means to recover it, and to tell you how greatly I shall 
think myself your debtor if you refuse not to employ them."
She stopt; but Cecilia hung back; fearful of her own strength, she dared 
venture at no professions; yet, how either to support, or dispute her 
compliance, she dreaded to think.
"I come to you, then," Mrs Delvile solemnly resumed, "in the name of Mr 
Delvile, and in the name of our whole family; a family as ancient as it is 
honourable, as honourable as it is ancient. Consider me as its representative, 
and hear in me its common voice, common opinion, and common address.
"My son, the supporter of our house, the sole guardian of its name, and the 
heir of our united fortunes, has selected you, we know, for the lady of his 
choice, and so fondly has, fixed upon you his affections, that he is ready to 
relinquish us all in preference to subduing them. To yourself alone, then, can 
we apply, and I come to you—"
"O hold, madam, hold!" interrupted Cecilia, whose courage now revived from 
resentment, "I know, what you would say; you come to tell me of your disdain; 
you come to reproach my presumption, and to kill me with your contempt! There 
is little occasion for such a step; I am depressed, I am self-condemned 
already; spare me, therefore, this insupportable humiliation, wound me not with 
your scorn, oppress me not with your superiority! I aim at no competition, I 
attempt no vindication, I acknowledge my own littleness as readily as you can 
despise it, and nothing but indignity could urge me to defend it!"
"Believe me," said Mrs Delvile, "I meant not to hurt or offend you, and I am 
sorry if I have appeared to you either arrogant or assuming. The peculiar and 
perilous situation of my family has perhaps betrayed me into offensive 
expressions, and made me guilty myself of an ostentation which in others has 
often disgusted me. Ill, indeed, can we any of us bear the test of experiment, 
when tried upon those subjects which call forth our particular propensities. We 
may strive to be disinterested, we may struggle to be impartial, but self will 
still predominate, still shew us the imperfection of our natures, and the 
narrowness of our souls. Yet acquit me, I beg, of any intentional insolence, 
and imagine not that in speaking highly of my own family, I, mean to depreciate 
yours: on the contrary, I know it to be respectable, I know, too, that were it 
the lowest in the kingdom, the first might envy it that it gave birth to such a 
daughter."
Cecilia, somewhat soothed by this speech, begged her pardon for having 
interrupted her, and she proceeded.
"To your family, then, I assure you, whatever may be the pride of our own, you 
being its offspring, we would not object. With your merit we are all well 
acquainted, your character has our highest esteem, and your fortune exceeds 
even our most sanguine desires. Strange at once and afflicting! that not all 
these requisites for the satisfaction of prudence, nor all these allurements 
for the gratification of happiness, can suffice to fulfil or to silence the 
claims of either! There are yet other demands to which we must attend, demands 
which ancestry and blood call upon us aloud to ratify! Such claimants are not 
to be neglected with impunity; they assert their rights with the authority of 
prescription, they forbid us alike either to bend to inclination, or stoop to 
interest, and from generation to generation their injuries will call out for 
redress, should their noble and long unsullied name be voluntarily consigned to 
oblivion!"
Cecilia, extremely struck by these words, scarce wondered, since so strong and 
so established were her opinions, that the obstacle to her marriage, though but 
one, should be considered as insuperable.
"Not, therefore, to your name are we averse," she continued, "but simply to our 
own more partial. To sink that, indeed, in any other, were base and 
unworthy:—what, then, must be the shock of my disappointment, should Mortimer 
Delvile, the darling of my hopes, the last survivor of his house, in whose 
birth I rejoiced as the promise of its support, in whose accomplishments I 
gloried, as the revival of its lustre,—should he, should, my son be the first 
to abandon it! to give up the name he seemed born to make live, and to cause in 
effect its utter annihilation!—Oh how should I know my son when an alien to 
his family! how bear to think I had cherished in my bosom the betrayer of its 
dearest interests, the destroyer of its very existence!"
Cecilia, scarce more afflicted than offended, now hastily answered, "Not for 
me, madam, shall he commit this crime, not on my account shall he be reprobated 
by his family! Think of him, therefore, no more, with any reference to me, for 
I would not be the cause of unworthiness or guilt in him to be mistress of the 
universe!"
"Nobly said!" cried Mrs Delvile, her eyes sparkling with joy, and her cheeks 
glowing with pleasure, "now again do I know Miss Beverley! now again see the 
refined, the excellent young woman, whose virtues taught me to expect the 
renunciation even of her own happiness, when found to be incompatible with her 
duty!"
Cecilia now trembled and turned pale; she scarce knew herself what she had 
said, but, she found by Mrs Delvile's construction of her words, they had been 
regarded as her final relinquishing of her son. She ardently wished to quit the 
room before she was called upon to confirm the sentence, but, she had not 
courage to make the effort, nor to rise, speak, or move.
"I grieve, indeed," continued Mrs Delvile, whose coldness and austerity were 
changed into mildness and compassion, "at the necessity I have been under to 
draw from you a concurrence so painful: but no other resource was in my power. 
My influence with Mortimer, whatever it may be, I have not any right to try, 
without obtaining your previous consent, since I regard him myself as bound to 
you in honour, and only to be released by your own virtuous desire. I will 
leave you, however, for my presence, I see, is oppressive to you. Farewell; and 
when you can forgive me, I think you will."
"I have nothing, madam," said Cecilia, coldly, "to forgive; you have only 
asserted your own dignity, and I have nobody to blame but myself, for having 
given you occasion."
"Alas," cried Mrs Delvile, "if worth and nobleness of soul on your part, if 
esteem and tenderest affection on mine, were all which that dignity which 
offends you requires, how should I crave the blessing of such a daughter! how 
rejoice in joining my son to excellence so like his own, and ensuring his 
happiness while I stimulated his virtue!"
"Do not talk to me of affection, madam," said Cecilia, turning away from her; 
"whatever you had for me is past,—even your esteem is gone,—you may pity 
me, indeed, but your pity is mixed with contempt, and I am not so abject as to 
find comfort from exciting it."
"O little," cried Mrs Delvile, looking at her with the utmost tenderness, 
"little do you see the state of my heart, for never have you appeared to me so 
worthy as at this moment! In tearing you from my son, I partake all the 
wretchedness I give, but your own sense of duty must something plead for the 
strictness with which I act up to mine."
She then moved towards the door.
"Is your carriage, madam," said Cecilia, struggling to disguise her inward 
anguish under an appearance of sullenness, "in waiting?"
Mrs Delvile then came back, and holding out her hand, while her eyes glistened 
with tears, said, "To part from you thus frigidly, while my heart so warmly 
admires you, is almost more than I can endure. Oh gentlest Cecilia! condemn not 
a mother who is impelled to this severity, who performing what she holds to be 
her duty, thinks the office her bitterest misfortune, who forsees in the rage 
of her husband, and the resistance of her son, all the misery of domestic 
contention, and who can only secure the honour of her family by destroying its 
peace!—You will not, then, give me your hand?—"
Cecilia, who had affected not to see that she waited for it, now coldly put it 
out, distantly [courtseying], and seeking to preserve her steadiness by 
avoiding to speak. Mrs Delvile took it, and as she repeated her adieu, 
affectionately pressed it to her lips; Cecilia, starting, and breathing short, 
from encreasing yet smothered agitation, called out "Why, why this 
condescension?—pray,—I entreat you, madam!—"
"Heaven bless you, my love!" said Mrs Delvile, dropping a tear upon the hand 
she still held, "heaven bless you, and restore the tranquillity you so nobly 
deserve!"
"Ah madam!" cried Cecilia, vainly striving to repress any longer the tears 
which now forced their way down her cheeks, "why will you break my heart with 
this kindness! why will you still compel me to love!—when now I almost wish 
to hate you!"—
"No, hate me not," said Mrs Delvile, kissing from her cheeks the tears that 
watered them, "hate me not, sweetest Cecilia, though in wounding your gentle 
bosom, I am almost detestable to myself. Even the cruel scene which awaits me 
with my son will not more deeply afflict me. But adieu,—I must now prepare 
for him!"
She then left the room: but Cecilia, whose pride had no power to resist this 
tenderness, ran hastily after her, saying "Shall I not see you again, madam?"
"You shall yourself decide," answered she; "if my coming will not give you more 
pain than pleasure, I will wait upon you whenever you please."
Cecilia sighed and paused; she knew not what to desire, yet rather wished any 
thing to be done, than quietly to sit down to uninterrupted reflection.
"Shall I postpone quitting this place," continued Mrs Delvile, "till to-morrow 
morning, and will you admit me this afternoon, should I call upon you again?"
"I should be sorry," said she, still hesitating, "to detain you,"—
"You will rejoice me," cried Mrs Delvile, "by bearing me in your sight."
And she then went into her carriage.
Cecilia, unfitted to attend her old friend, and unequal to the task of 
explaining to her the cruel scene in which she had just been engaged, then 
hastened to her own apartment. Her hitherto stifled emotions broke forth in 
tears and repinings: her fate was finally determined, and its determination was 
not more unhappy than humiliating; she was openly rejected by the family whose 
alliance she was known to wish; she was compelled to refuse the man of her 
choice, though satisfied his affections were her own. A misery so peculiar she 
found hard to support, and almost bursting with conflicting passions, her heart 
alternately swelled from offended pride, and sunk from disappointed tenderness.





