
Cecelia was still in this tempestuous state, when a message was brought her 
that a gentleman was below stairs, who begged to have the honour of seeing her. 
She concluded he was Delvile, and the thought of meeting him merely to 
communicate what must so bitterly afflict him, redoubled her distress, and she 
went down in an agony of perturbation and sorrow.
He met her at the door, where, before he could speak, "Mr Delvile," she cried, 
in a hurrying manner, "why will you come? Why will you thus insist upon seeing 
me, in defiance of every obstacle, and in contempt of my prohibition?"
"Good heavens," cried he, amazed, "whence this reproach? Did you not permit me 
to wait upon you with the result of my enquiries? Had I not your consent—but 
why do you look thus disturbed?—Your eyes are red,—you have been 
weeping.—Oh my Cecilia! have I any share in your sorrow?—Those tears, which 
never flow weakly, tell me, have they—has one of them been shed upon my 
account?"
"And what," cried she, "has been the result of your enquiries?—Speak quick, 
for I wish to know,—and in another instant I must be gone."
"How strange," cried the astonished Delvile, "is this language! how strange are 
these looks! What new has come to pass? Has any fresh calamity happened? Is 
there yet some evil which I do not expect?"
"Why will you not answer first?" cried she; "when I have spoken, you will 
perhaps be less willing."
"You terrify, you shock, you amaze me! What dreadful blow awaits me? For what 
horror are you preparing me?—That which I have just experienced, and which 
tore you from me even at the foot of the altar, still remains inexplicable, 
still continues to be involved in darkness and mystery; for the wretch who 
separated us I have never been able to discover."
"Have you procured, then, no intelligence?"
"No, none; though since we parted I have never rested a moment."
"Make, then, no further enquiry, for now all explanation would be useless. That 
we were parted, we know, though why we cannot tell: but that again we shall 
ever meet—-"
She, stopt; her streaming eyes cast upwards, and a deep sigh bursting from her 
heart.
"Oh what," cried Delvile, endeavouring to take her hand, which she hastily 
withdrew from him, "what does this mean? loveliest, dearest Cecilia, my 
betrothed, my affianced wife! why flow those tears which agony only can wring 
from you? Why refuse me that hand which so lately was the pledge of your faith? 
Am I not the same Delvile to whom so few days since you gave it? Why will you 
not open to him your heart? Why thus distrust his honour, and repulse his 
tenderness? Oh why, giving him such exquisite misery, refuse him the smallest 
consolation?"
"What consolation," cried the weeping Cecilia, "can I give? Alas! it is not, 
perhaps, you who most want it!—"
Here the door was opened by one of the Miss Charltons, who came into the room 
with a message from her grandmother, requesting to see Cecilia. Cecilia, 
ashamed of being thus surprised with Delvile, and in tears, waited not either 
to make any excuse to him, or any answer to Miss Charlton, but instantly 
hurried out of the room;—not, however, to her old friend, whom now less than 
ever she could meet, but to her own apartment, where a very short indulgence of 
grief was succeeded by the severest examination of her own conduct.
A retrospection of this sort rarely brings much subject of exultation, when 
made with the rigid sincerity of secret impartiality: so much stronger is our 
reason than our virtue, so much higher our sense of duty than our performance!
All she had done she now repented, all she had said she disapproved; her 
conduct, seldom equal to her notions of right, was now infinitely below them, 
and the reproaches of her judgment made her forget for a while the afflictions 
which had misled it.
The sorrow to which she had openly given way in the presence of Delvile, though 
their total separation but the moment before had been finally decreed, she 
considered as a weak effusion of tenderness, injurious to delicacy, and 
censurable by propriety. "His power over my heart," cried she, "it were now, 
indeed, too late to conceal, but his power over my understanding it is time to 
cancel. I am not to be his,—my own voice has ratified the renunciation, and 
since I made it to his mother, it must never, without her consent, be 
invalidated. Honour, therefore, to her, and regard for myself, equally command 
me to fly him, till I cease to be thus affected by his sight."
When Delvile, therefore, sent up an entreaty that he might be again admitted 
into her presence, she returned for answer that she was not well, and could not 
see any body.
He then left the house, and, in a few minutes, she received the following note 
from him.
To Miss Beverley. You drive me from you, Cecilia, tortured with suspense, and 
distracted with apprehension, you drive me from you, certain of my misery, yet 
leaving me to bear it as I may! I would call you unfeeling, but that I saw you 
were unhappy; I would reproach you with tyranny, but that your eyes when you 
quitted me were swollen with weeping! I go, therefore, I obey the harsh 
mandate, since my absence is your desire, and I will shut myself up at 
Biddulph's till I receive your commands. Yet disdain not to reflect that every 
instant will seem endless, while Cecilia must appear to me unjust, or wound my 
very soul by the recollection of her in sorrow. MORTIMER DELVILE.
The mixture of fondness and resentment with which this letter was dictated, 
marked so strongly the sufferings and disordered state of the writer, that all 
the softness of Cecilia returned when she perused it, and left her not a wish 
but to lessen his inquietude, by assurances of unalterable regard: yet she 
determined not to trust herself in his sight, certain they could only meet to 
grieve over each other, and conscious that a participation of sorrow would but 
prove a reciprocation of tenderness. Calling, therefore, upon her duty to 
resist her inclination, she resolved to commit the whole affair to the will of 
Mrs Delvile, to whom, though under no promise, she now considered herself 
responsible. Desirous, however, to shorten the period of Delvile's uncertainty, 
she would not wait till the time she had appointed to see his mother, but wrote 
the following note to hasten their meeting.
To the Hon. Mrs Delvile. MADAM,—Your son is now at Bury; shall I acquaint him 
of your arrival? or will you announce it yourself? Inform me of your desire, 
and I will endeavour to fulfil it. As my own Agent I regard myself no longer; 
if, as yours, I can give pleasure, or be of service, I shall gladly receive 
your commands. I have the honour to be, Madam, your most obedient servant, 
CECILIA BEVERLEY.
When she had sent off this letter, her heart was more at ease, because 
reconciled with her conscience: she had sacrificed the son, she had resigned 
herself to the mother; it now only remained to heal her wounded pride, by 
suffering the sacrifice with dignity, and to recover her tranquility in virtue, 
by making the resignation without repining.
Her reflections, too, growing clearer as the mist of passion was dispersed, she 
recollected with confusion her cold and sullen behaviour to Mrs Delvile. That 
lady had but done what she had believed was her duty, and that duty was no more 
than she had been taught to expect from her. In the beginning of her visit, and 
while doubtful of its success, she had indeed, been austere, but the moment 
victory appeared in view, she became tender, affectionate and gentle. Her 
justice, therefore, condemned the resentment to which she had given way, and 
she fortified her mind for the interview which was to follow, by an earnest 
desire to make all reparation both to Mrs Delvile and herself for that which 
was past.
In this resolution she was not a little strengthened, by seriously considering 
with herself the great abatement to all her possible happiness, which must have 
been made by the humiliating circumstance of forcing herself into a family 
which held all connection with her as disgraceful. She desired not to be the 
wife even of Delvile upon such terms, for the more she esteemed and admired 
him, the more anxious she became for his honour, and the less could she endure 
being regarded herself as the occasion of its diminution.
Now, therefore, her plan of conduct settled, with calmer spirits, though a 
heavy heart, she attended upon Mrs Charlton; but fearing to lose the steadiness 
she had just acquired before it should be called upon, if she trusted herself 
to relate the decision which had been made, she besought her for the present to 
dispense with the account, and then forced herself into conversation upon less 
interesting subjects.
This prudence had its proper effect, and with tolerable tranquility she heard 
Mrs Delvile again announced, and waited upon her in the parlour with an air of 
composure.
Not so did Mrs Delvile receive her; she was all eagerness and emotion; she flew 
to her the moment she appeared, and throwing her arms around her, warmly 
exclaimed "Oh charming girl! Saver of our family! preserver of our honour! How 
poor are words to express my admiration! how inadequate are thanks in return 
for such obligations as I owe you!"
"You owe me none, madam," said Cecilia, suppressing a sigh; "on my side will be 
all the obligation, if you can pardon the petulance of my behaviour this 
morning."
"Call not by so harsh a name," answered Mrs Delvile, "the keenness of a 
sensibility by which you have yourself alone been the sufferer. You have had a 
trial the most severe, and however able to sustain, it was impossible you 
should not feel it. That you should give up any man whose friends solicit not 
your alliance, your mind is too delicate to make wonderful; but your generosity 
in submitting, unasked, the arrangement of that resignation to those for whose 
interest it is made, and your high sense of honour in holding yourself 
accountable to me, though under no tie, and bound by no promise, mark a 
greatness of mind which calls for reverence rather than thanks, and which I 
never can praise half so much as I admire."
Cecilia, who received this applause but as a confirmation of her rejection, 
thanked her only by courtsying; and Mrs Delvile, having seated herself next 
her, continued her speech.
"My son, you have the goodness to tell me, is here,—have you seen him?"
"Yes, madam," answered she, blushing, "but hardly for a moment."
"And he knows not of my arrival?" No,—I believe he certainly does not."
"Sad then, is the trial which awaits him, and heavy for me the office I must 
perform! Do you expect to see him again?"
"No,—yes,—perhaps—indeed I hardly—" She stammered, and Mrs Delvile, 
taking her hand, said "Tell me, Miss Beverley, why should you see him again?"
Cecilia was thunderstruck by this question, and, colouring yet more deeply, 
looked down, but could not answer.
"Consider," continued Mrs Delvile, "the purpose of any further meeting; your 
union is impossible, you have nobly consented to relinquish all thoughts of it 
why then tear your own heart, and torture his, by an intercourse which seems 
nothing but an ill-judged invitation to fruitless and unavailing sorrow?"
Cecilia was still silent; the truth of the expostulation her reason 
acknowledged, but to assent to its consequence her whole heart refused.
"The ungenerous triumph of little female vanity," said Mrs Delvile, "is far, I 
am sure, from your mind, of which the enlargement and liberality will rather 
find consolation from lessening than from embittering his sufferings. Speak to 
me, then, and tell me honestly, judiciously, candidly tell me, will it not be 
wiser and more right, to avoid rather than seek an object which can only give 
birth to regret? an interview which can excite no sensations but of misery and 
sadness?" Cecilia then turned pale, she endeavoured to speak, but could not; 
she wished to comply,—yet to think she had seen him for the last time, to 
remember how abruptly she had parted from him, and to fear she had treated him 
unkindly;—these were obstacles which opposed her concurrence, though both 
judgment and propriety demanded it.
"Can you, then," said Mrs Delvile, after a pause, "can you wish to see Mortimer 
merely to behold his grief? Can you desire he should see you, only to sharpen 
his affliction at your loss?"
"O no!" cried Cecilia, to whom this reproof restored speech and resolution, "I 
am not so despicable, I am not, I hope, so unworthy!—I will—be ruled by you 
wholly; I will commit to you every thing;—yet once, perhaps,—no more!"—
"Ah, my dear Miss Beverley! to meet confessedly for once,—what were that but 
planting a dagger in the heart of Mortimer? What were it but infusing poison 
into your own?
"If you think so, madam," said she, "I had better—I will certainly—" she 
sighed, stammered, and stopt.
"Hear me," cried Mrs Delvile, "and rather let me try to convince than persuade 
you. Were there any possibility, by argument, by reflection, or even by 
accident, to remove the obstacles to our connection, then would it be well to 
meet, for then might discussion turn to account, and an interchange of 
sentiments be productive of some happy expedients: but here—"
She hesitated, and Cecilia, shocked and ashamed, turned away her face, and 
cried "I know, madam, what you would say,—here all is over! and therefore—"
"Yet suffer me," interrupted she, "to be explicit, since we speak upon, this 
matter now for the last time. Here, then, I say, where not ONE doubt remains, 
where ALL is finally, though not happily decided, what can an interview 
produce? Mischief of every sort, pain, horror, and repining! To Mortimer you 
may think it would be kind, and grant it to his prayers, as an alleviation of 
his misery; mistaken notion! nothing could so greatly augment it. All his 
passions would be raised, all his prudence would be extinguished, his soul 
would be torn with resentment and regret, and force, only, would part him from 
you, when previously he knew that parting was to be eternal. To yourself—"
"Talk not, madam, of me," cried the unhappy Cecilia, "what you say of your son 
is sufficient, and I will yield—-"
"Yet hear me," proceeded she, "and believe me not so unjust as to consider him 
alone; you, also, would be an equal, though a less stormy sufferer. You fancy, 
at this moment, that once more to meet him would soothe your uneasiness, and 
that to take of him a farewell, would soften the pain of the separation: how 
false such reasoning! how dangerous such consolation! acquainted ere you meet 
that you were to meet him no more, your heart would be all softness and grief, 
and at the very moment when tenderness should be banished from your 
intercourse, it would bear down all opposition of judgment, spirit, and 
dignity: you would hang upon every word, because every word would seem the 
last, every look, every expression would be rivetted in your memory, and his 
image in this parting distress would-be painted upon your mind, in colours that 
would eat into its peace, and perhaps never be erased."
"Enough, enough," said Cecilia, "I will not see him,—I will not even desire 
it!"
"Is this compliance or conviction? Is what I have said true, or only 
terrifying?"
"Both, both! I believe, indeed, the conflict would have overpowered me,—I see 
you are right,—and I thank you, madam, for saving me from a scene I might so 
cruelly have rued."
"Oh Daughter of my mind!" cried Mrs Delvile, rising and embracing her, "noble, 
generous, yet gentle Cecilia! what tie, what connection, could make you more 
dear to me? Who is there like you? Who half so excellent? So open to reason, so 
ingenuous in error! so rational! so just! so feeling, yet so wise!"
"You are very good," said Cecilia, with a forced serenity, "and I am thankful 
that your resentment for the past obstructs not your lenity for the present."
"Alas, my love, how shall I resent the past, when I ought myself to have 
foreseen this calamity! and I should have foreseen it, had I not been informed 
you were engaged, and upon your engagement built our security. Else had I been 
more alarmed, for my own admiration would have bid me look forward to my son's. 
You were just, indeed, the woman he had least chance to resist, you were 
precisely the character to seize his very soul. To a softness the most fatally 
alluring, you join a dignity which rescues from their own contempt even the 
most humble of your admirers. You seem born to have all the world wish your 
exaltation, and no part of it murmur at your superiority. Were any obstacle but 
this insuperable one in the way, should nobles, nay, should princes offer their 
daughters to my election, I would reject without murmuring the most magnificent 
proposals, and take in triumph to my heart my son's nobler choice!"
"Oh madam," cried Cecilia, "talk not to me thus!—speak not such flattering 
words!—ah, rather scorn and upbraid me, tell me you despise my character, my 
family and my connections,—load, load me with contempt, but do not thus 
torture me with approbation!"
"Pardon me, sweetest girl, if I have awakened those emotions you so wisely seek 
to subdue. May my son but emulate your example, and my pride in his virtue 
shall be the solace of my affliction for his misfortunes."
She then tenderly embraced her, and abruptly took her leave.
Cecilia had now acted her part, and acted it to her own satisfaction; but the 
curtain dropt when Mrs Delvile left the house, nature resumed her rights, and 
the sorrow of her heart was no longer disguised or repressed. Some faint ray of 
hope had till now broke through the gloomiest cloud of her misery, and secretly 
flattered her that its dispersion was possible, though distant: but that ray 
was extinct, that hope was no more; she had solemnly promised to banish Delvile 
her sight, and his mother had absolutely declared that even the subject had 
been discussed for the last time.
Mrs Charlton, impatient of some explanation of the morning's transactions, soon 
sent again to beg Cecilia would come to her. Cecilia reluctantly obeyed, for 
she feared encreasing her indisposition by the intelligence she had to 
communicate; she struggled, therefore, to appear to her with tolerable 
calmness, and in briefly relating what had passed, forbore to mingle with the 
narrative her own feelings and unhappiness.
Mrs Charlton heard the account with the utmost concern; she accused Mrs Delvile 
of severity, and even of cruelty; she lamented the strange accident by which 
the marriage ceremony had been stopt, and regretted that it had not again been 
begun, as the only means to have rendered ineffectual the present fatal 
interposition. But the grief of Cecilia, however violent, induced her not to 
join in this regret; she mourned only the obstacle which had occasioned the 
separation, and not the incident which had merely interrupted the ceremony: 
convinced, by the conversations in which she had just been engaged, of Mrs 
Delvile's inflexibility, she rather rejoiced than repined that she had put it 
to no nearer trial: sorrow was all she felt; for her mind was too liberal to 
harbour resentment against a conduct which she saw was dictated by a sense of 
right; and too ductile and too affectionate to remain unmoved by the personal 
kindness which had softened the rejection, and the many marks of esteem and 
regard which had shewn her it was lamented, though considered as indispensable.
How and by whom this affair had been betrayed to Mrs Delvile she knew not; but 
the discovery was nothing less than surprising, since, by various unfortunate 
accidents, it was known to so many, and since, in the horror and confusion of 
the mysterious prohibition to the marriage, neither Delvile nor herself had 
thought of even attempting to give any caution to the witnesses of that scene, 
not to make it known: an attempt, however, which must almost necessarily have 
been unavailing, as the incident was too extraordinary and too singular to have 
any chance of suppression.
During this conversation, one of the servants came to inform Cecilia, that a 
man was below to enquire if there was no answer to the note he had brought in 
the forenoon.
Cecilia, greatly distressed, knew not upon what to resolve; that the patience 
of Delvile should be exhausted, she did not, indeed, wonder, and to relieve his 
anxiety was now almost her only wish; she would therefore instantly have 
written to him, confessed her sympathy in his sufferings, and besought him to 
endure with fortitude an evil which was no longer to be withstood: but she was 
uncertain whether he was yet acquainted with the journey of his mother to Bury, 
and having agreed to commit to her the whole management of the affair, she 
feared it would be dishonourable to take any step in it without her 
concurrence. She returned, therefore, a message that she had yet no answer 
ready.
In a very few minutes Delvile called himself, and sent up an earnest request 
for permission to see her.
Here, at least, she had no perplexity; an interview she had given her positive 
word to refuse, and therefore, without a moment's hesitation, she bid the 
servant inform him she was particularly engaged, and sorry it was not in her 
power to see any company.
In the greatest perturbation he left the house, and immediately wrote to her 
the following lines.
To Miss Beverley. I entreat you to see me! if only for an instant, I entreat, I 
implore you to see me! Mrs Charlton may be present, all the world, if you wish 
it, may be present,—but deny me not admission, I supplicate, I conjure you!
I will call in an hour; in that time you may have finished your present 
engagement. I will otherwise wait longer, and call again. You will not, I 
think, turn me from' your door, and, till I have seen you, I can only live in 
its vicinity. M. D.
The man who brought this note, waited not for any answer.
Cecilia read it in an agony of mind inexpressible: she saw, by its style, how 
much Delvile was irritated, and her knowledge of his temper made her certain 
his irritation proceeded from believing himself ill-used. She ardently wished 
to appease and to quiet him, and regretted the necessity of appearing obdurate 
and unfeeling, even more, at that moment, than the separation itself. To a mind 
priding in its purity, and animated in its affections, few sensations can 
excite keener misery, than those by which an apprehension is raised of being 
thought worthless or ungrateful by the objects of our chosen regard. To be 
deprived of their society is less bitter, to be robbed of our own tranquillity 
by any other means, is less afflicting.
Yet to this it was necessary to submit, or incur the only penalty which, to 
such a mind, would be more severe, self-reproach: she had promised to be 
governed by Mrs Delvile, she had nothing, therefore, to do but obey her.
Yet to turn, as he expressed himself, from the door, a man who, but for an 
incident the most incomprehensible, would now have been sole master of herself 
and her actions, seemed so unkind and so tyrannical, that she could not endure 
to be within hearing of his repulse: she begged, therefore, the use of Mrs 
Charlton's carriage, and determined to make a visit to Mrs Harrel till Delvile 
and his mother had wholly quitted Bury. She was not, indeed, quite satisfied in 
going to the house of Mr Arnott, but she had no time to weigh objections, and 
knew not any other place to which still greater might not be started.
She wrote a short letter to Mrs Delvile, acquainting her with her purpose, and 
its reason, and repeating her assurances that she would be guided by her 
implicitly; and then, embracing Mrs Charlton, whom she left to the care of her 
grand-daughters, she got into a chaise, accompanied only by her maid, and one 
man and horse, and ordered the postilion to drive to Mr Arnott's.





