
The evening was already far advanced, and before she arrived at the end of her 
little journey it was quite dark. When they came within a mile of Mr Arnott's 
house, the postilion, in turning too suddenly from the turnpike to the 
cross-road, overset the carriage. The accident, however, occasioned no other 
mischief than delaying their proceeding, and Cecilia and her maid were helped 
out of the chaise unhurt. The servants, assisted by a man who was walking upon 
the road, began lifting it up; and Cecilia, too busy within to be attentive to 
what passed without, disregarded what went forward, till she heard her footman 
call for help. She then hastily advanced to enquire what was the matter, and 
found that the passenger who had lent his aid, had, by working in the dark, 
unfortunately slipped his foot under one of the wheels, and so much hurt it, 
that without great pain he could not put it to the ground.
Cecilia immediately desired that the sufferer might be carried to his own home 
in the chaise, while she and the maid walked on to Mr Arnott's, attended by her 
servant on horseback.
This little incident proved of singular service to her upon first entering the 
house; Mrs Harrel was at supper with her brother, and hearing the voice of 
Cecilia in the hall, hastened with the extremest surprise to enquire what had 
occasioned so late a visit; followed by Mr Arnott, whose amazement was 
accompanied with a thousand other sensations too powerful for speech. Cecilia, 
unprepared with any excuse, instantly related the adventure she had met with on 
the road, which quieted their curiosity, by turning their attention to her 
personal safety. They ordered a room to be prepared for her, entreated her to 
go to rest with all speed, and postpone any further account till the next day. 
With this request she most gladly complied, happy to be spared the 
embarrassment of enquiry, and rejoiced to be relieved from the fatigue of 
conversation. Her night was restless and miserable: to know how Delvile would 
bear her flight was never a moment from her thoughts, and to hear whether he 
would obey or oppose his mother was her incessant wish. She was fixt, however, 
to be faithful in refusing to see him, and at least to suffer nothing new from 
her own enterprize or fault.
Early in the morning Mrs Harrel came to see her. She was eager to learn why, 
after invitations repeatedly refused, she was thus suddenly arrived without 
any; and she was still more eager to talk of herself, and relate the weary life 
she led thus shut up in the country, and confined to the society of her brother.
Cecilia evaded giving any immediate answer to her questions, and Mrs Harrel, 
happy in an opportunity to rehearse her own complaints, soon forgot that she 
had asked any, and, in a very short time, was perfectly, though imperceptibly, 
contented to be herself the only subject upon which they conversed.
But not such was the selfishness of Mr Arnott; and Cecilia, when she went down 
to breakfast, perceived with the utmost concern that he had passed a night as 
sleepless as her own. A visit so sudden, so unexpected, and so unaccountable, 
from an object that no discouragement could make him think of with 
indifference, had been a subject to him of conjecture and wonder that had 
revived all the hopes and the fears which had lately, though still 
unextinguished, lain dormant. The enquiries, however, which his sister had 
given up, he ventured not to renew, and thought himself but too happy in her 
presence, whatever might be the cause of her visit.
He perceived, however, immediately, the sadness that hung upon her mind, and 
his own was redoubled by the sight: Mrs Harrel, also, saw that she looked ill, 
but attributed it to the fatigue and fright of the preceding evening, well 
knowing that a similar accident would have made her ill herself, or fancy that 
she was so.
During breakfast, Cecilia sent for the postilion, to enquire of him how the man 
had fared, whose good-natured assistance in their distress had been so 
unfortunate to himself. He answered that he had turned out to be a day 
labourer, who lived about half a mile off. And then, partly to gratify her own 
humanity, and partly to find any other employment for herself and friends than 
uninteresting conversation, she proposed that they should all walk to the poor 
man's habitation, and offer him some amends for the injury he had received. 
This was readily assented to, and the postilion directed them whither to go. 
The place was a cottage, situated upon a common; they entered it without 
ceremony, and found a clean looking woman at work.
Cecilia enquired for her husband, and was told that he was gone out to 
day-labour.
"I am very glad to hear it," returned she; "I hope then he has got the better 
of the accident he met with last night?"
"It was not him, madam," said the woman, "met with the accident, it was 
John;—there he is, working in the garden."
To the garden then they all went, and saw him upon the ground, weeding.
The moment they approached he arose, and, without speaking, began to limp, for 
he could hardly walk; away.
"I am sorry, master," said Cecilia, "that you are so much hurt. Have you had 
anything put to your foot?"
The man made no answer, but still turned away from her; a glance, however, of 
his eye, which the next instant he fixed upon the ground, startled her; she 
moved round to look at him again,—and perceived Mr Belfield!
"Good God!" she exclaimed; but seeing him still retreat, she recollected in a 
moment how little he would be obliged to her for betraying him, and suffering 
him to go on, turned back to her party, and led the way again into the house.
As soon as the first emotion of her surprise was over, she enquired how long 
John had belonged to this cottage, and what was his way of life.
The woman answered he had only been with them a week, and that he went out to 
day-labour with her husband.
Cecilia then, finding their stay kept him from his employment, and willing to 
save him the distress of being seen by Mr Arnott or Mrs Harrel, proposed their 
returning home. She grieved most sincerely at beholding in so melancholy an 
occupation a young man of such talents and abilities; she wished much to assist 
him, and began considering by what means it might be done, when, as they were 
walking from the cottage, a voice at some distance called out "Madam! Miss 
Beverley!" and, looking round, to her utter amazement she saw Belfield 
endeavouring to follow her.
She instantly stopt, and he advanced, his hat in his hand, and his whole air 
indicating he sought not to be disguised.
Surprised at this sudden change of behaviour, she then stept forward to meet 
him, accompanied by her friends: but when they came up to each other, she 
checked her desire of speaking, to leave him fully at liberty to make himself 
known, or keep concealed.
He bowed with a look of assumed gaiety and ease, but the deep scarlet that 
tinged his whole face manifested his internal confusion; and in a voice that 
attempted to sound lively, though its tremulous accents betrayed uneasiness and 
distress, he exclaimed, with a forced smile, "Is it possible Miss Beverley can 
deign to notice a poor miserable day-labourer such as I am? how will she be 
justified in the beau monde, when even the sight of such a wretch ought to fill 
her with horror? Henceforth let hysterics be blown to the winds, and let nerves 
be discarded from the female vocabulary, since a lady so young and fair can 
stand this shock without hartshorn or fainting!"
"I am happy," answered Cecilia, "to find your spirits so good; yet my own, I 
must confess, are not raised by seeing you in this strange situation."
"My spirits!" cried he, with an air of defiance, "never were they better, never 
so good as at this moment. Strange as seems my situation, it is all that I 
wish; I have found out, at last, the true secret of happiness! that secret 
which so long I pursued in vain, but which always eluded my grasp, till the 
instant of despair arrived, when, slackening my pace, I gave it up as a 
phantom. Go from me, I cried, I will be cheated no more! thou airy bubble! thou 
fleeting shadow! I will live no longer in thy sight, since thy beams dazzle 
without warming me! Mankind seems only composed as matter for thy experiments, 
and I will quit the whole race, that thy delusions may be presented to me no 
more!"
This romantic flight, which startled even Cecilia, though acquainted with his 
character, gave to Mrs Harrel and Mr Arnott the utmost surprize; his 
appearance, and the account they had just heard of him, having by no means 
prepared them for such sentiments or such language.
"Is then this great secret of happiness," said Cecilia, "nothing, at last, but 
total seclusion from the world?"
"No, madam," answered he, "it is Labour with Independence."
Cecilia now wished much to ask some explanation of his affairs, but was 
doubtful whether he would gratify her before Mrs Harrel and Mr Arnott, and hurt 
to keep him standing, though he leant upon a stick; she told him, therefore, 
she would at present detain him no longer, but endeavour again to see him 
before she quitted her friends.
Mr Arnott then interfered, and desired his sister would entreat Miss Beverley 
to invite whom she pleased to his house.
Cecilia thanked him, and instantly asked Belfield to call upon her in the 
afternoon.
"No, madam, no," cried he, "I have done with visits and society! I will not so 
soon break through a system with much difficulty formed, when all my future 
tranquility depends upon adhering to it. The worthlessness of mankind has 
disgusted me with the world, and my resolution in quitting it shall be 
immoveable as its baseness."
"I must not venture then," said Cecilia, "to enquire—"
"Enquire, madam," interrupted he, with quickness, "what you please: there is 
nothing I will not answer to you,—to this lady, to this gentleman, to any and 
to every body. What can I wish to conceal, where I have nothing to gain or to 
lose? When first, indeed, I saw you, I involuntarily shrunk; a weak shame for a 
moment seized me, I felt fallen and debased, and I wished to avoid you: but a 
little recollection brought me back to my senses, And where, cried I, is the 
disgrace of exercising for my subsistence the strength with which I am endued? 
and why should I blush to lead the life which uncorrupted Nature first 
prescribed to man?"
"Well, then," said Cecilia, more and more interested to hear him, "if you will 
not visit us, will you at least permit us to return with you to some place 
where you can be seated?"
"I will with pleasure," cried he, "go to any place where you may be seated 
yourselves; but for me, I have ceased to regard accommodation or inconvenience."
They then all went back to the cottage, which was now empty, the woman being 
out at work.
"Will you then, Sir," said Cecilia, "give me leave to enquire whether Lord 
Vannelt is acquainted with your retirement, and if it will not much surprize 
and disappoint him?"
"Lord Vannelt," cried he, haughtily, "has no right to be surprised. I would 
have quitted his house, if no other, not even this cottage, had a roof to 
afford me shelter!"
"I am sorry, indeed, to hear it," said Cecilia; "I had hoped he would have 
known your value, and merited your regard."
"Ill-usage," answered he, "is as hard to relate as to be endured. There is 
commonly something pitiful in a complaint; and though oppression in a general 
sense provokes the wrath of mankind, the investigation of its minuter 
circumstances excites nothing but derision. Those who give the offence, by the 
worthy few may be hated; but those who receive it, by the world at large will 
be despised. Conscious of this, I disdained making any appeal; myself the only 
sufferer, I had a right to be the only judge, and, shaking off the base 
trammels of interest and subjection, I quitted the house in silent indignation, 
not chusing to remonstrate, where I desired not to be reconciled."
"And was there no mode of life," said Cecilia, "to adopt, but living with Lord 
Vannelt, or giving up the whole world?"
"I weighed every thing maturely," answered he, "before I made my determination, 
and I found it so much, the most eligible, that I am certain I can never repent 
it. I had friends who would with pleasure have presented me to some other 
nobleman; but my whole heart revolted against leading that kind of life, and I 
would not, therefore, idly rove from one great man to another, adding ill-will 
to disgrace, and pursuing hope in defiance of common sense; no; when I quitted 
Lord Vannelt, I resolved to give up patronage for ever.
"I retired to private lodgings to deliberate what next could be done. I had 
lived in many ways, I had been unfortunate or imprudent in all. The law I had 
tried, but its rudiments were tedious and disgusting; the army, too, but there 
found my mind more fatigued with indolence, than my body with action; general 
dissipation had then its turn, but the expence to which it led was ruinous, and 
self-reproach baffled pleasure while I pursued it; I have even—yes, there are 
few things I have left untried,—I have even,—for why now disguise it?—"
He stopt and coloured, but in a quicker voice presently proceeded.
"Trade, also, has had its share in my experiments; for that, in truth, I was 
originally destined,—but my education had ill suited me to such a 
destination, and the trader's first maxim I reversed, in lavishing when I ought 
to have accumulated.
"What, then, remained for me? to run over again the same irksome round I had 
not patience, and to attempt any thing new I was unqualified: money I had none; 
my friends I could bear to burthen no longer; a fortnight I lingered in 
wretched irresolution,—a simple accident at the end of it happily settled me; 
I was walking, one morning, in Hyde Park, forming a thousand plans for my 
future life, but quarrelling with them all; when a gentleman met me on 
horseback, from whom, at my Lord Vannelt's, I had received particular 
civilities; I looked another way not to be seen by him, and the change in my 
dress since I left his Lordship's made me easily pass unnoticed. He had rode 
on, however, but a few yards, before, by some accident or mismanagement, he had 
a fall from his horse. Forgetting all my caution, I flew instantly to his 
assistance; he was bruised, but not otherwise hurt; I helpt him up, and he 
leant 'pon my arm; in my haste of enquiring how he had fared, I called him by 
his name. He knew me, but looked surprised at my appearance; he was speaking to 
me, however, with kindness, when seeing some gentlemen of his acquaintance 
gallopping up to him, he hastily disengaged himself from me, and instantly 
beginning to recount to them what had happened, he sedulously looked another 
way, and joining his new companions, walked off without taking further notice 
of me. For a moment I was almost tempted to trouble him to come back; but a 
little recollection told me how ill he deserved my resentment, and bid me 
transfer it for the future from the pitiful individual to the worthless 
community.
"Here finished my deliberation; the disgust to the world which I had already 
conceived, this little incident confirmed; I saw it was only made for the great 
and the rich;—poor, therefore, and low, what had I to do in it? I determined 
to quit it for ever, and to end every disappointment, by crushing every hope.
"I wrote to Lord Vannelt to send my trunks to my mother; I wrote to my mother 
that I was well, and would soon let her hear more: I then paid off my lodgings, 
and 'shaking the dust from my feet,' bid a long adieu to London; and, 
committing my route to chance, strole on into the country, without knowing or 
caring which way.
"My first thought was simply to seek retirement, and to depend for my future 
repose upon nothing but a total seclusion from society: but my slow method of 
travelling gave me time for reflection, and reflection soon showed me the error 
of this notion.
"Guilt, cried I, may, indeed, be avoided by solitude; but will misery? will 
regret? will deep dejection of mind? no, they will follow more assiduously than 
ever; for what is there to oppose them, where neither business occupies the 
time, nor hope the imagination? where the past has left nothing but resentment, 
and the future opens only to a dismal, uninteresting void? No stranger to life, 
I knew human nature could not exist on such terms; still less a stranger to 
books, I respected the voice of wisdom and experience in the first of 
moralists, and most enlightened of men, [Footnote: Dr Johnson.] and reading the 
letter of Cowley, I saw the vanity and absurdity of panting after solitude. 
[Footnote: Life of Cowley, p.34.]
"I sought not, therefore, a cell; but, since I purposed to live for myself, I 
determined for myself also to think. Servility of imitation has ever been as 
much my scorn as servility of dependence; I resolved, therefore, to strike out 
something new, and no more to retire as every other man had retired, than to 
linger in the world as every other man had lingered.
"The result of all you now see. I found out this cottage, and took up my abode 
in it. I am here out of the way of all society, yet avoid the great evil of 
retreat, having nothing to do. I am constantly, not capriciously employed, and 
the exercise which benefits my health, imperceptibly raises my spirits in 
despight of adversity. I am removed from all temptation, I have scarce even the 
power to do wrong; I have no object for ambition, for repining I have no 
time:—I have, found out, I repeat, the true secret of happiness, Labour with 
Independence."
He stopt; and Cecilia, who had listened to this narrative with a mixture of 
compassion, admiration and censure, was too much struck with its singularity to 
be readily able to answer it. Her curiosity to hear him had sprung wholly from 
her desire to assist him, and she had expected from his story to gather some 
hint upon which her services might be offered. But none had occurred; he 
professed himself fully satisfied with his situation; and though reason and 
probability contradicted the profession, she could not venture to dispute it 
with any delicacy or prudence.
She thanked him, therefore, for his relation, with many apologies for the 
trouble she had given him, and added, "I must not express my concern for 
misfortunes which you seem to regard as conducive to your contentment, nor 
remonstrate at the step you have taken, since you have been led to it by 
choice, not necessity: but yet, you must pardon me if I cannot help hoping I 
shall some time see you happier, according to the common, however vulgar ideas 
of the rest of the world."
"No, never, never! I am sick of mankind, not from theory, but experience; and 
the precautions I have taken against mental fatigue, will secure me from 
repentance, or any desire of change; for it is not the active, but the indolent 
who weary; it is not the temperate, but the pampered who are capricious."
"Is your sister, Sir, acquainted with this change in your fortune and opinions?"
"Poor girl, no! She and her unhappy mother have borne but too long with my 
enterprizes and misfortunes. Even yet they would sacrifice whatever they 
possess to enable me to play once more the game so often lost; but I will not 
abuse their affection, nor suffer them again to be slaves to my caprices, nor 
dupes to their own delusive expectations. I have sent them word I am happy; I 
have not yet told them how or where. I fear much the affliction of their 
disappointment, and, for a while, shall conceal from them my situation, which 
they would fancy was disgraceful, and grieve at as cruel."
"And is it not cruel?" said Cecilia, "is labour indeed so sweet? and can you 
seriously derive happiness from what all others consider as misery?"
"Not sweet," answered he, "in itself; but sweet, most sweet and salutary in its 
effects. When I work, I forget all the world; my projects for the future, my 
disappointments from the past. Mental fatigue is overpowered by personal; I 
toil till I require rest, and that rest which nature, not luxury demands, leads 
not to idle meditation, but to sound, heavy, necessary sleep. I awake the next 
morning to the same thought-exiling business, work again till my powers are 
exhausted, and am relieved again at night by the same health-recruiting 
insensibility."
"And if this," cried Cecilia, "is the life of happiness, why have we so many 
complaints of the sufferings of the poor, and why so eternally do we hear of 
their hardships and distress?"
"They have known no other life. They are strangers, therefore, to the felicity 
of their lot. Had they mingled in the world, fed high their fancy with hope, 
and looked forward with expectation of enjoyment; had they been courted by the 
great, and offered with profusion adulation for their abilities, yet, even when 
starving, been offered nothing else!—had they seen an attentive circle wait 
all its entertainment from their powers, yet found themselves forgotten as soon 
as out of sight, and perceived themselves avoided when no longer buffoons!—Oh 
had they known and felt provocations such as these, how gladly would their 
resentful spirits turn from the whole unfeeling race, and how would they 
respect that noble and manly labour, which at once disentangles them from such 
subjugating snares, and enables them to fly the ingratitude they abhor! Without 
the contrast of vice, virtue unloved may be lovely; without the experience of 
misery, happiness is simply a dull privation of evil."
"And are you so content," cried Cecilia, "with your present situation, as even 
to think it offers you reparation for your past sufferings?"
"Content!" repeated he with energy, "O more than content, I am proud of my 
present situation! I glory in chewing to the world, glory still more in shewing 
to myself, that those whom I cannot but despise I will not scruple to defy, and 
that where I have been treated unworthily, I will scorn to be obliged."
"But will you pardon me," said Cecilia, "should I ask again, why in quitting 
Lord Vannelt, you concluded no one else worthy a trial?"
"Because it was less my Lord Vannelt, madam, than my own situation, that 
disgusted me: for though I liked not his behaviour, I found him a man too 
generally esteemed to flatter myself better usage would await me in merely 
changing my abode, while my station was the same. I believe, indeed, he never 
meant to offend me; but I was offended the more that he should think me an 
object to receive indignity without knowing it. To have had this pointed out to 
him, would have been at once mortifying and vain; for delicacy, like taste, can 
only partially be taught, and will always be superficial and erring where it is 
not innate. Those wrongs, which though too trifling to resent, are too 
humiliating to be borne, speech can convey no idea of; the soul must feel, or 
the understanding can never comprehend them."
"But surely," said Cecilia, "though people of refinement are rare, they yet 
exist; why, then, remove yourself from the possibility of meeting with them?"
"Must I run about the nation," cried he, "proclaiming my distress, and 
describing my temper? telling the world that though dependent I demand respect 
as well as assistance; and publishing to mankind, that though poor I will 
accept no gifts if offered with contumely? Who will listen to such an account? 
who will care for my misfortunes, but as they may humble me to his service? Who 
will hear my mortifications, but to say I deserve them? what has the world to 
do with my feelings and peculiarities? I know it too well to think calamity 
will soften it; I need no new lessons to instruct me that to conquer affliction 
is more wise than to relate it."
"Unfortunate as you have been," said Cecilia, "I cannot wonder at your 
asperity; but yet, it is surely no more than justice to acknowledge, that 
hard-heartedness to distress is by no means the fault of the present times: on 
the contrary, it is scarce sooner made known, than every one is ready to 
contribute to its relief."
"And how contribute?" cried he, "by a paltry donation of money? Yes, the man 
whose only want is a few guineas, may, indeed, obtain them; but he who asks 
kindness and protection, whose oppressed spirit calls for consolation even more 
than his ruined fortune for repair, how is his struggling soul, if superior to 
his fate, to brook the ostentation of patronage, and the insolence of 
condescension? Yes, yes, the world will save the poor beggar who is starving; 
but the fallen wretch, who will not cringe for his support, may consume in his 
own wretchedness without pity and without help!"
Cecilia now saw that the wound his sensibility had received was too painful for 
argument, and too recent immediately to be healed. She forbore, therefore, to 
detain him any longer, but expressing her best wishes, without venturing to 
hint at her services, she arose, and they all took their leave;—Belfield 
hastening, as they went, to return to the garden, where, looking over the hedge 
as they passed, they saw him employed again in weeding, with the eagerness of a 
man who pursues his favourite occupation.
Cecilia half forgot her own anxieties and sadness, in the concern which she 
felt for this unfortunate and extraordinary young man. She wished much to 
devise some means for drawing him from a life of such hardship and obscurity; 
but what to a man thus "jealous in honour," thus scrupulous in delicacy, could 
she propose, without more risk of offence, than probability of obliging? His 
account had, indeed, convinced her how much he stood in need of assistance, but 
it had shewn her no less how fastidious he would be in receiving it.
Nor was she wholly without fear that an earnest solicitude to serve him, his 
youth, talents, and striking manners considered, might occasion even in himself 
a misconstruction of her motives, such as she already had given birth to in his 
forward and partial mother.
The present, therefore, all circumstances weighed, seemed no season for her 
liberality, which she yet resolved to exert the first moment it was unopposed 
by propriety.





