
A week passed, during which Cecilia, however sad, spent her time as usual with 
the family, denying to herself all voluntary indulgence of grief, and 
forbearing to seek consolation from solitude, or relief from tears. She never 
named Delvile, she begged Mrs Charlton never to mention him; she called to her 
aid the account she had received from Dr Lyster of his firmness, and 
endeavoured, by an emulous ambition, to fortify her mind from the weakness of 
depression and regret.
This week, a week of struggle with all her feelings, was just elapsed, when she 
received by the post the following letter from Mrs Delvile.
To Miss Beverley.
BRISTOL, Oct. 21.
My sweet young friend will not, I hope, be sorry to hear of my safe arrival at 
this place: to me every account of her health and welfare, will ever be the 
intelligence I shall most covet to receive. Yet I mean not to ask for it in 
return; to chance I will trust for information, and I only write now to say I 
shall write no more.
Too much for thanks is what I owe you, and what I think of you is beyond all 
power of expression. Do not, then, wish me ill, ill as I have seemed to merit 
of you, for my own heart is almost broken by the tyranny I have been compelled 
to practise upon yours. And now let me bid a long adieu to you, my admirable 
Cecilia; you shall not be tormented with a useless correspondence, which can 
only awaken painful recollections, or give rise to yet more painful new 
anxieties. Fervently will I pray for the restoration of your happiness, to 
which nothing can so greatly contribute as that wise, that uniform command, so 
feminine, yet so dignified, you maintain over your passions; which often I have 
admired, though never so feelingly as at this conscious moment! when my own 
health is the sacrifice of emotions most fatally unrestrained.
Send to me no answer, even if you have the sweetness to wish it; every new 
proof of the generosity of your nature is to me but a new wound. Forget us, 
therefore, wholly,—alas! you have only known us for sorrow! forget us, dear 
and invaluable Cecilia! though, ever, as you have nobly deserved, must you be 
fondly and gratefully remembered by AUGUSTA DELVILE.
The attempted philosophy, and laboured resignation of Cecilia, this letter 
destroyed: the struggle was over, the apathy was at an end, and she burst into 
an agony of tears, which finding the vent they had long sought, now flowed 
unchecked down her cheeks, sad monitors of the weakness of reason opposed to 
the anguish of sorrow!
A letter at once so caressing, yet so absolute, forced its way to her heart, in 
spite of the fortitude she had flattered herself was its guard. In giving up 
Delvile she was satisfied of the propriety of seeing him no more, and convinced 
that even to talk of him would be folly and imprudence; but to be told that for 
the future they must remain strangers to the existence of each other—there 
seemed in this a hardship, a rigour, that was insupportable.
"Oh what," cried she, "is human nature! in its best state how imperfect! that a 
woman such as this, so noble in character, so elevated in sentiment, with 
heroism to sacrifice to her sense of duty the happiness of a son, whom with joy 
she would die to serve, can herself be thus governed by prejudice, thus 
enslaved, thus subdued by opinion!" Yet never, even when miserable, unjust or 
irrational; her grief was unmixed with anger, and her tears streamed not from 
resentment, but affliction. The situation of Mrs Delvile, however different, 
she considered to be as wretched as her own. She read, therefore, with sadness, 
but not bitterness, her farewell, and received not with disdain, but with 
gratitude, her sympathy. Yet though her indignation was not irritated, her 
sufferings were doubled, by a farewell so kind, yet so despotic, a sympathy so 
affectionate, yet so hopeless.
In this first indulgence of grief which she had granted to her disappointment, 
she was soon interrupted by a summons down stairs to a gentleman.
Unfit and unwilling to be seen, she begged that he might leave his name, and 
appoint a time for calling again.
Her maid brought for answer, that he believed his name was unknown to her, and 
desired to see her now, unless she was employed in some matter of moment. She 
then put up her letter, and went into the parlour; and there, to her infinite 
amazement, beheld Mr Albany.
"How little, Sir," she cried, "did I expect this pleasure."
"This pleasure," repeated he, "do you call it?—what strange abuse of words! 
what causeless trifling with honesty! is language of no purpose but to wound 
the ear with untruths? is the gift of speech only granted us to pervert the use 
of understanding? I can give you no pleasure, I have no power to give it any 
one; you can give none to me-the whole world could not invest you with the 
means!"
"Well, Sir," said Cecilia, who had little spirit to defend herself, "I will not 
vindicate the expression, but of this I will unfeignedly assure you, I am at 
least as glad to see you just now, as I should be to see anybody."
"Your eyes," cried he, "are red, your voice is inarticulate;—young, rich, and 
attractive, the world at your feet; that world yet untried, and its falsehood 
unknown, how have you thus found means to anticipate misery? which way have you 
uncovered the cauldron of human woes? Fatal and early anticipation! that cover 
once removed, can never be replaced; those woes, those boiling woes, will pour 
out upon you continually, and only when your heart ceases to beat, will their 
ebullition cease to torture you!"
"Alas!" cried Cecilia, shuddering, "how cruel, yet how true!"
"Why went you," cried he, "to the cauldron? it came not to you. Misery seeks 
not man, but man misery. He walks out in the sun, but stops not for a cloud; 
confident, he pursues his way, till the storm which, gathering, he might have 
avoided, bursts over his devoted head. Scared and amazed, he repents his 
temerity; he calls, but it is then too late; he runs, but it is thunder which 
follows him! Such is the presumption of man, such at once is the arrogance and 
shallowness of his nature! And thou, simple and blind! hast thou, too, followed 
whither Fancy has led thee, unheeding that thy career was too vehement for 
tranquility, nor missing that lovely companion of youth's early innocence, 
till, adventurous and unthinking, thou hast lost her for ever!"
In the present weak state of Cecilia's spirits, this attack was too much for 
her; and the tears she had just, and with difficulty restrained, again forced 
their way down her cheeks, as she answered, "It is but too true,—I have lost 
her for ever!"
"Poor thing," said he, while the rigour of his countenance was softened into 
the gentlest commiseration, "so young!—looking, too, so innocent—'tis 
hard!—And is nothing left thee? no small remaining hope, to cheat, humanely 
cheat thy yet not wholly extinguished credulity?"
Cecilia wept without answering.
"Let me not," said he, "waste my compassion upon nothing; compassion is with me 
no effusion of affectation; tell me, then, if thou deservest it, or if thy 
misfortunes are imaginary, and thy grief is factitious?"
"Factitious," repeated she, "Good heaven!"
"Answer me, then, these questions, in which I shall comprise the only 
calamities for which sorrow has no controul, or none from human motives. Tell 
me, then, have you lost by death the friend of your bosom?"
"No!"
"Is your fortune dissipated by extravagance, and your power of relieving the 
distressed at an end?"
"No; the power and the will are I hope equally undiminished."
"O then, unhappy girl! have you been guilty of some vice, and hangs remorse 
thus heavy on your conscience?"
"No, no; thank heaven, to that misery, at least, I am a stranger!"
His countenance now again resumed its severity, and, in the sternest manner, 
"Whence then," he said, "these tears? and what is this caprice you dignify with 
the name of sorrow?—strange wantonness of indolence and luxury! perverse 
repining of ungrateful plenitude!—oh hadst thou known what I have 
suffered!"—
"Could I lessen what you have suffered," said Cecilia, "I should sincerely 
rejoice; but heavy indeed must be your affliction, if mine in its comparison 
deserves to be styled caprice!"
"Caprice!" repeated he, "'tis joy! 'tis extacy compared with mine!—Thou hast 
not in licentiousness wasted thy inheritance! thou hast not by remorse barred 
each avenue to enjoyment! nor yet has the cold grave seized the beloved of thy 
soul!"
"Neither," said Cecilia, "I hope, are the evils you have yourself sustained so 
irremediable?"
"Yes, I have borne them all!—have borne? I bear them still; I shall bear them 
while I breathe! I may rue them, perhaps, yet longer."
"Good God!" cried Cecilia, shrinking, "what a world is this! how full of woe 
and wickedness!"
"Yet thou, too, canst complain," cried he, "though happy in life's only 
blessing, Innocence! thou, too, canst murmur, though stranger to death's only 
terror, Sin! Oh yet if thy sorrow is unpolluted with guilt, be regardless of 
all else, and rejoice in thy destiny!"
"But who," cried she, deeply sighing, "shall teach me such a lesson of joy, 
when all within rises to oppose it?"
"I," cried he, "will teach it thee, for I will tell thee my own sad story. Then 
wilt thou find how much happier is thy lot, then wilt thou raise thy head in 
thankful triumph."
"O no! triumph comes not so lightly! yet if you will venture to trust me with 
some account of yourself, I shall be glad to hear it, and much obliged by the 
communication."
"I will," he answered, "whatever I may suffer: to awaken thee from this dream 
of fancied sorrow, I will open all my wounds, and thou shalt probe them with 
fresh shame."
"No, indeed," cried Cecilia with quickness, "I will not hear you, if the 
relation will be so painful."
"Upon me this humanity is lost," said he, "since punishment and penitence alone 
give me comfort. I will tell thee, therefore, my crimes, that thou mayst know 
thy own felicity, lest, ignorant it means nothing but innocence, thou shouldst 
lose it, unconscious of its value. Listen then to me, and learn what Misery is! 
Guilt is alone the basis of lasting unhappiness;—Guilt is the basis of mine, 
and therefore I am a wretch for ever!"
Cecilia would again have declined hearing him, but he refused to be spared: and 
as her curiosity had long been excited to know something of his history, and 
the motives of his extraordinary conduct, she was glad to have it satisfied, 
and gave him the utmost attention.
"I will not speak to you of my family," said he; "historical accuracy would 
little answer to either of us. I am a native of the West Indies, and I was 
early sent hither to be educated. While I was yet at the University, I saw, I 
adored, and I pursued the fairest flower that ever put forth its sweet buds, 
the softest heart that ever was broken by ill-usage! She was poor and 
unprotected, the daughter of a villager; she was untaught and unpretending, the 
child of simplicity! But fifteen summers had she bloomed, and her heart was an 
easy conquest; yet, once made mine, it resisted all allurement to infidelity. 
My fellow students attacked her; she was assaulted by all the arts of 
seduction; flattery, bribery, supplication, all were employed, yet all failed; 
she was wholly my own; and with sincerity so attractive, I determined to marry 
her in defiance of all worldly objections.
"The sudden death of my father called me hastily to Jamaica; I feared leaving 
this treasure unguarded, yet in decency could neither marry nor take her 
directly; I pledged my faith, therefore, to return to her, as soon as I had 
settled my affairs, and I left to a bosom friend the inspection of her conduct 
in my absence.
"To leave her was madness,—to trust in man was madness,—Oh hateful race! 
how has the world been abhorrent to me since that time! I have loathed the 
light of the sun, I have shrunk from the commerce of my fellow creatures; the 
voice of man I have detested, his sight I have abominated!—but oh, more than 
all should I be abominated myself!
"When I came to my fortune, intoxicated with sudden power, I forgot this fair 
blossom, I revelled in licentiousness and vice, and left it exposed and 
forlorn. Riot succeeded riot, till a fever, incurred by my own intemperance, 
first gave me time to think. Then was she revenged, for then first remorse was 
my portion: her image was brought back to my mind with frantic fondness, and 
bitterest contrition. The moment I recovered, I returned to England; I flew to 
claim her,—but she was lost! no one knew whither she was gone; the wretch I 
had trusted pretended to know least of all; yet, after a furious search, I 
traced her to a cottage, where he had concealed her himself!
"When she saw me, she screamed and would have flown; I stopt her, and told her 
I came faithfully and honourably to make her my wife:—her own faith and 
honour, though sullied, were not extinguished, for she instantly acknowledged 
the fatal tale of her undoing!
"Did I recompense this ingenuousness? this unexampled, this beautiful sacrifice 
to intuitive integrity? Yes! with my curses!—I loaded her with execrations, I 
reviled her in language the most opprobrious, I insulted her even for her 
confession! I invoked all evil upon her from the bottom of my heart—She knelt 
at my feet, she implored my forgiveness and compassion, she wept with the 
bitterness of despair,—and yet I spurned her from me!—Spurned?—let me not 
hide my shame! I barbarously struck her!—nor single was the blow!—it was 
doubled, it was reiterated!—Oh wretch, unyielding and unpitying! where shall 
hereafter be clemency for thee!—So fair a form! so young a culprit! so 
infamously seduced! so humbly penitent!
"In this miserable condition, helpless and deplorable, mangled by these savage 
hands, and reviled by this inhuman tongue, I left her, in search of the villain 
who had destroyed her: but, cowardly as treacherous, he had absconded. 
Repenting my fury, I hastened to her again; the fierceness of my cruelty shamed 
me when I grew calmer, the softness of her sorrow melted me upon recollection: 
I returned, therefore, to soothe her,—but again she was gone! terrified with 
expectation of insult, she hid herself from all my enquiries. I wandered in 
search of her two long years to no purpose, regardless of my affairs, and of 
all things but that pursuit. At length, I thought I saw her—in London, alone, 
and walking in the streets at midnight,—I fearfully followed her,—and 
followed her into an house of infamy!
"The wretches by whom she was surrounded were noisy and drinking, they heeded 
me little,—but she saw and knew me at once! She did not speak, nor did 
I,—but in two moments she fainted and fell.
"Yet did I not help her; the people took their own measures to recover her, and 
when she was again able to stand, would have removed her to another apartment.
"I then went forward, and forcing them away from her with all the strength of 
desperation, I turned to the unhappy sinner, who to chance only seemed to leave 
what became of her, and cried, From this scene of vice and horror let me yet 
rescue you! you look still unfit for such society, trust yourself, therefore, 
to me. I seized her hand, I drew, I almost dragged her away. She trembled, she 
could scarce totter, but neither consented nor refused, neither shed a tear, 
nor spoke a word, and her countenance presented a picture of affright, 
amazement, and horror.
"I took her to a house in the country, each of us silent the whole way. I gave 
her an apartment and a female attendant, and ordered for her every convenience 
I could suggest. I stayed myself in the same house, but distracted with remorse 
for the guilt and ruin into which I had terrified her, I could not bear her 
sight.
"In a few days her maid assured me the life she led must destroy her; that she 
would taste nothing but bread and water, never spoke, and never slept.
"Alarmed by this account, I flew into her apartment; pride and resentment gave 
way to pity and fondness, and I besought her to take comfort. I spoke, however, 
to a statue, she replied not, nor seemed to hear me. I then humbled myself to 
her as in the days of her innocence and first power, supplicating her notice, 
entreating even her commiseration! all was to no purpose; she neither received 
nor repulsed me, and was alike inattentive to exhortation and to prayer.
"Whole hours did I spend at her feet, vowing never to arise till she spoke to 
me,—all, all, in vain! she seemed deaf, mute, insensible; her face unmoved, a 
settled despair fixed in her eyes,—those eyes that had never looked at me but 
with dove-like softness and compliance!—She sat constantly in one chair, she 
never changed her dress, no persuasions could prevail with her to lie down, and 
at meals she just swallowed so much dry bread as might save her from dying for 
want of food.
"What was the distraction of my soul, to find her bent upon this course to her 
last hour!—quick came that hour, but never will it be forgotten! rapidly it 
was gone, but eternally it will be remembered!
"When she felt herself expiring, she acknowledged she had made a vow, upon 
entering the house, to live speechless and motionless, as a pennance for her 
offences!
"I kept her loved corpse till my own senses failed me,—it was then only torn 
from me,—and I have lost all recollection of three years of my existence!"
Cecilia shuddered at this hint, yet was not surprised by it; Mr Gosport had 
acquainted her he had been formerly confined; and his flightiness, wildness, 
florid language, and extraordinary way of life, bad long led her to suspect his 
reason had been impaired.
"The scene to which my memory first leads me back," he continued, "is visiting 
her grave; solemnly upon it I returned her vow, though not by one of equal 
severity. To her poor remains did I pledge myself, that the day should never 
pass in which I would receive nourishment, nor the night come in which I would 
take rest, till I had done, or zealously attempted to do, some service to a 
fellow-creature.
"For this purpose have I wandered from city to city, from the town to the 
country, and from the rich to the poor. I go into every house where I can gain 
admittance, I admonish all who will hear me, I shame even those who will not. I 
seek the distressed where ever they are hid, I follow the prosperous to beg a 
mite to serve them. I look for the Dissipated in public, where, amidst their 
licentiousness, I check them; I pursue the Unhappy in private, where I counsel 
and endeavour to assist them. My own power is small; my relations, during my 
sufferings, limiting me to an annuity; but there is no one I scruple to 
solicit, and by zeal I supply ability.
"Oh life of hardship and pennance! laborious, toilsome, and restless! but I 
have merited no better, and I will not repine at it; I have vowed that I will 
endure it, and I will not be forsworn.
"One indulgence alone from time to time I allow myself,—'tis Music! which has 
power to delight me even to rapture! it quiets all anxiety, it carries me out 
of myself, I forget through it every calamity, even the bitterest anguish.
"Now then, that thou hast heard me, tell me, hast thou cause of sorrow?"
"Alas," cried Cecilia, "this indeed is a Picture of Misery to make my lot seem 
all happiness!"
"Art thou thus open to conviction?" cried he, mildly; "and dost thou not fly 
the voice of truth! for truth and reproof are one."
"No, I would rather seek it; I feel myself wretched, however inadequate may be 
the cause; I wish to be more resigned, and if you can instruct me how, I shall 
thankfully attend to you."
"Oh yet uncorrupted creature!" cried he, "with joy will I be thy monitor,—joy 
long untasted! Many have I wished to serve, all, hitherto, have rejected my 
offices; too honest to flatter them, they had not the fortitude to listen to 
me; too low to advance them, they had not the virtue to bear with me. You alone 
have I yet found pure enough not to fear inspection, and good enough to wish to 
be better. Yet words alone will not content me; I must also have deeds. Nor 
will your purse, however readily opened, suffice, you must give to me also your 
time and your thoughts; for money sent by others, to others only will afford 
relief; to enlighten your own cares, you must distribute it yourself."
"You shall find me," said she, "a docile pupil, and most glad to be instructed 
how my existence may be useful."
"Happy then," cried he, "was the hour that brought me to this country; yet not 
in search of you did I come, but of the mutable and ill-fated Belfield. Erring, 
yet ingenious young man! what a lesson to the vanity of talents, to the gaiety, 
the brilliancy of wit, is the sight of that green fallen plant! not sapless by 
age, nor withered by disease, but destroyed by want of pruning, and bending, 
breaking by its own luxuriance!"
"And where, Sir, is he now?
"Labouring wilfully in the field, with those who labour compulsatorily; such 
are we all by nature, discontented, perverse, and changeable; though all have 
not courage to appear so, and few, like Belfield, are worth watching when they 
do. He told me he was happy; I knew it could not be: but his employment was 
inoffensive, and I left him without reproach. In this neighbourhood I heard of 
you, and found your name was coupled with praise. I came to see if you deserved 
it; I have seen, and am satisfied."
"You are not, then, very difficult, for I have yet done nothing. How are we to 
begin these operations you propose? You have awakened me by them to an 
expectation of pleasure, which nothing else, I believe, could just now have 
given me."
"We will work," cried he, "together, till not a woe shall remain upon your 
mind. The blessings of the fatherless, the prayers of little children, shall 
heal all your wounds with balm of sweetest fragrance. When sad, they shall 
cheer, when complaining, they shall soothe you. We will go to their roofless 
houses, and see them repaired; we will exclude from their dwellings the 
inclemency of the weather; we will clothe them from cold, we will rescue them 
from hunger. The cries of distress shall be changed to notes of joy: your heart 
shall be enraptured, mine, too, shall revive—oh whither am I wandering? I am 
painting an Elysium! and while I idly speak, some fainting object dies for want 
of succour! Farewell; I will fly to the abodes of wretchedness, and come to you 
to-morrow to render them the abodes of happiness."
He then went away.
This singular visit was for Cecilia most fortunately timed: it almost surprised 
her out of her peculiar grief, by the view which it opened to her of general 
calamity; wild, flighty, and imaginative as were his language and his counsels, 
their morality was striking, and their benevolence was affecting. Taught by him 
to compare her state with that of at least half her species, she began more 
candidly to weigh what was left with what was withdrawn, and found the balance 
in her favour. The plan he had presented to her of good works was consonant to 
her character and inclinations; and the active charity in which he proposed to 
engage her, re-animated her fallen hopes, though to far different subjects from 
those which had depressed them. Any scheme of worldly happiness would have 
sickened and disgusted her; but her mind was just in the situation to be 
impressed with elevated piety, and to adopt any design in which virtue humoured 
melancholy.





