
The next morning, while the family was at breakfast, Belfield, according to his 
promise, made his visit.
A high colour overspread his face as he entered the room, resulting from a 
sensation of grief at his fallen fortune, and shame at his altered appearance, 
which though he endeavoured to cover under an air of gaiety and unconcern, gave 
an awkwardness to his manners, and a visible distress to his countenance: Mr 
Monckton received him with pleasure, and Cecilia, who saw the conflict of his 
philosophy with his pride, dressed her features once more in smiles, which 
however faint and heartless, shewed her desire to reassure him. Miss Bennet, as 
usual when not called upon by the master or lady of the house, sat as a cypher; 
and Lady Margaret, always disagreeable and repulsive to the friends of her 
husband, though she was not now more than commonly ungracious, struck the 
quick-feeling and irritable Belfield, to wear an air of rude superiority meant 
to reproach him with his disgrace.
This notion, which strongly affected him, made him, for one instant, hesitate 
whether he should remain another in the same room with her: but the 
friendliness of Mr Monckton, and the gentleness and good breeding of Cecilia, 
seemed so studious to make amends for her moroseness, that he checked his too 
ready indignation, and took his seat at the table. Yet was it some time before 
he could recover even the assumed vivacity which this suspected insult had 
robbed him of, sufficiently to enter into conversation with any appearance of 
ease or pleasure. But, after a while, soothed by the attentions of Cecilia and 
Mr Monckton, his uneasiness wore off, and the native spirit and liveliness of 
his character broke forth with their accustomed energy.
"This good company, I hope," said he, addressing himself, however, only to 
Cecilia, "will not so much mistake the thing as to criticise my dress of this 
morning; since it is perfectly according to rule, and to rule established from 
time immemorial: but lest any of you should so much err as to fancy shabby what 
is only characteristic, I must endeavour to be beforehand with the malice of 
conjecture, and have the honour to inform you, that I am enlisted in the 
Grub-street regiment, of the third story, and under the tattered banner of 
scribbling volunteers! a race which, if it boasts not the courage of heroes, at 
least equals them in enmity. This coat, therefore, is merely the uniform of my 
corps, and you will all, I hope, respect it as emblematical of wit and 
erudition."
"We must at least respect you," said Cecilia, "who thus gaily can sport with 
it."
"Ah, madam!" said he, more seriously, "it is not from you I ought to look for 
respect! I must appear to you the most unsteady and coward-hearted of beings. 
But lately I blushed to see you from poverty, though more worthily employed 
than when I had been seen by you in affluence; that shame vanquished, another 
equally narrow took its place, and yesterday I blushed again that you detected 
me in a new pursuit, though I had only quitted my former one from a conviction 
it was ill chosen. There seems in human nature a worthlessness not to be 
conquered! yet I will struggle with it to the last, and either die in the 
attempt, or dare seem that which I am, without adding to the miseries of life, 
the sting, the envenomed sting of dastardly false shame!"
"Your language is wonderfully altered within this twelvemonth," said Mr 
Monckton; "the worthlessness of human nature! the miseries of life! this from 
you! so lately the champion of human nature, and the panegyrist of human life!"
"Soured by personal disappointment," answered he, "I may perhaps speak with too 
much acrimony; yet, ultimately, my opinions have not much changed. Happiness is 
given to us with more liberality than we are willing to confess; it is judgment 
only that is dealt us sparingly, and of that we have so little, that when 
felicity is before us, we turn to the right or left, or when at the right or 
left, we proceed strait forward. It has been so with me; I have sought it at a 
distance, amidst difficulty and danger, when all that I could wish has been 
immediately within my grasp."
"It must be owned," said Mr Monckton, "after what you have suffered from this 
world you were wont to defend, there is little reason to wonder at some change 
in your opinion."
"Yet whatever have been my sufferings," he answered, "I have generally been 
involved in them by my own rashness or caprice. My last enterprise especially, 
from which my expectations were highest, was the most ill-judged of any. I 
considered not how little my way of life had fitted me for the experiment I was 
making, how irreparably I was enervated by long sedentary habits, and how 
insufficient for bodily strength was mental resolution. We may fight against 
partial prejudices, and by spirit and fortitude we may overcome them; but it 
will not do to war with the general tenor of education. We may blame, despise, 
regret as we please, but customs long established, and habits long indulged, 
assume an empire despotic, though their power is but prescriptive. Opposing 
them is vain; Nature herself, when forced aside, is not more elastic in her 
rebound."
"Will you not then," said Cecilia, "since your experiment has failed, return 
again to your family, and to the plan of life you formerly settled?"
"You speak of them together," said he, with a smile, "as if you thought them 
inseparable; and indeed my own apprehension they would be deemed so, has made 
me thus fear to see my friends, since I love not resistance, yet cannot again 
attempt the plan of life they would have me pursue. I have given up my cottage, 
but my independence is as dear to me as ever; and all that I have gathered from 
experience, is to maintain it by those employments for which my education has 
fitted me, instead of seeking it injudiciously by the very road for which it 
has unqualified me."
"And what is this independence," cried Mr Monckton, "which has thus bewitched 
your imagination? a mere idle dream of romance and enthusiasm; without 
existence in nature, without possibility in life. In uncivilised countries, or 
in lawless times, independence, for a while, may perhaps stalk abroad; but in a 
regular government, 'tis only the vision of a heated brain; one part of a 
community must inevitably hang upon another, and 'tis a farce to call either 
independent, when to break the chain by which they are linked would prove 
destruction to both. The soldier wants not the officer more than the officer 
the soldier, nor the tenant the landlord, more than the landlord the tenant. 
The rich owe their distinction, their luxuries, to the poor, as much as the 
poor owe their rewards, their necessaries, to the rich."
"Man treated as an Automaton," answered Belfield, "and considered merely with 
respect to his bodily operations, may indeed be called dependent, since the 
food by which he lives, or, rather, without which he dies, cannot wholly be 
cultivated and prepared by his own hands: but considered in a nobler sense, he 
deserves not the degrading epithet; speak of him, then, as a being of feeling 
and understanding, with pride to alarm, with nerves to tremble, with honour to 
satisfy, and with a soul to be immortal!—as such, may he not claim the 
freedom of his own thoughts? may not that claim be extended to the liberty of 
speaking, and the power of being governed by them? and when thoughts, words, 
and actions are exempt from controul, will you brand him with dependency merely 
because the Grazier feeds his meat, and the Baker kneads his bread?"
"But who is there in the whole world," said Mr Monckton, "extensive as it is, 
and dissimilar as are its inhabitants, that can pretend to assert, his 
thoughts, words, and actions, are exempt from controul? even where interest, 
which you so much disdain, interferes not,—though where that is I confess I 
cannot tell!—are we not kept silent where we wish to reprove by the fear of 
offending? and made speak where we wish to be silent by the desire of obliging? 
do we not bow to the scoundrel as low as to the man of honour? are we not by 
mere forms kept standing when tired? made give place to those we despise? and 
smiles to those we hate? or if we refuse these attentions, are we not regarded 
as savages, and shut out of society?"
"All these," answered Belfield, "are so merely matters of ceremony, that the 
concession can neither cost pain to the proud, nor give pleasure to the vain. 
The bow is to the coat, the attention is to the rank, and the fear of offending 
ought to extend to all mankind. Homage such as this infringes not our 
sincerity, since it is as much a matter of course as the dress that we wear, 
and has as little reason to flatter a man as the shadow which follows him. I no 
more, therefore, hold him deceitful for not opposing this pantomimical parade, 
than I hold him to be dependent for eating corn he has not sown."
"Where, then, do you draw the line? and what is the boundary beyond which your 
independence must not step?"
"I hold that man," cried he, with energy, "to be independent, who treats the 
Great as the Little, and the Little as the Great, who neither exults in riches 
nor blushes in poverty, who owes no man a groat, and who spends not a shilling 
he has not earned."
"You will not, indeed, then, have a very numerous acquaintance, if this is the 
description of those with whom you purpose to associate! but is it possible you 
imagine you can live by such notions? why the Carthusian in his monastery, who 
is at least removed from temptation, is not mortified so severely as a man of 
spirit living in the world, who would prescribe himself such rules."
"Not merely have I prescribed," returned Belfield, "I have already put them in 
practice; and far from finding any pennance, I never before found happiness. I 
have now adopted, though poor, the very plan of life I should have elected if 
rich; my pleasure, therefore, is become my business, and my business my 
pleasure."
"And is this plan," cried Monckton, "nothing more than turning Knight-errant to 
the Booksellers?"
"'Tis a Knight-errantry," answered Belfield, laughing, "which, however 
ludicrous it may seem to you, requires more soul and more brains than any 
other. Our giants may, indeed, be only windmills, but they must be attacked 
with as much spirit, and conquered with as much bravery, as any fort or any 
town, in time of war [to] be demolished; and though the siege, I must confess, 
may be of less national utility, the assailants of the quill have their honour 
as much at heart as the assailants of the sword."
"I suppose then," said Monckton, archly, "if a man wants a biting lampoon, or 
an handsome panegyric, some newspaper scandal, or a sonnet for a lady—"
"No, no," interrupted Belfield eagerly, "if you imagine me a hireling scribbler 
for the purposes of defamation or of flattery, you as little know my situation 
as my character. My subjects shall be my own, and my satire shall be general. I 
would as much disdain to be personal with an anonymous pen, as to attack an 
unarmed man in the dark with a dagger I had kept concealed."
A reply of rallying incredulity was rising to the lips of Mr Monckton, when 
reading in the looks of Cecilia an entire approbation of this sentiment, he 
checked his desire of ridicule, and exclaimed, "spoken like a man of honour, 
and one whose works may profit the world!"
"From my earliest youth to the present hour," continued Belfield, "literature 
has been the favourite object of my pursuit, my recreation in leisure, and my 
hope in employment. My propensity to it, indeed, has been so ungovernable, that 
I may properly call it the source of my several miscarriages throughout life. 
It was the bar to my preferment, for it gave me a distaste to other studies; it 
was the cause of my unsteadiness in all my undertakings, because to all I 
preferred it. It has sunk me to distress, it has involved me in difficulties; 
it has brought me to the brink of ruin by making me neglect the means of 
living, yet never, till now, did I discern it might itself be my support."
"I am heartily glad, Sir," said Cecilia, "your various enterprizes and 
struggles have at length ended in a project which promises you so much 
satisfaction. But you will surely suffer your sister and your mother to partake 
of it? for who is there that your prosperity will make so happy?"
"You do them infinite honour, madam, by taking any interest in their affairs; 
but to own to you the truth, what to me appears prosperity, will to them wear 
another aspect. They have looked forward to my elevation with expectations the 
most improbable, and thought everything within my grasp, with a simplicity 
incredible. But though their hopes were absurd, I am pained by their 
disappointment, and I have not courage to meet their tears, which I am sure 
will not be spared when they see me."
"'Tis from tenderness, then," said Cecilia, half smiling, "that you are cruel, 
and from affection to your friends that you make them believe you have 
forgotten them?"
There was a delicacy in this reproach exactly suited to work upon Belfield, who 
feeling it with quickness, started up, and cried, "I believe I am wrong!—I 
will go to them this moment!"
Cecilia felt eager to second the generous impulse; but Mr Monckton, laughing at 
his impetuosity, insisted he should first finish his breakfast.
"Your friends," said Cecilia, "can have no mortification so hard to bear as 
your voluntary absence; and if they see but that you are happy, they will soon 
be reconciled to whatever situation you may chuse."
"Happy!" repeated he, with animation, "Oh I am in Paradise! I am come from a 
region in the first rude state of nature, to civilization and refinement! the 
life I led at the cottage was the life of a savage; no intercourse with 
society, no consolation from books; my mind locked up, every source dried of 
intellectual delight, and no enjoyment in my power but from sleep and from 
food. Weary of an existence which thus levelled me with a brute, I grew ashamed 
of the approximation, and listening to the remonstrance of my understanding, I 
gave up the precipitate plan, to pursue one more consonant to reason. I came to 
town, hired a room, and sent for pen, ink and paper: what I have written are 
trifles, but the Bookseller has not rejected them. I was settled, therefore, in 
a moment, and comparing my new occupation with that I had just quitted, I 
seemed exalted on the sudden from a mere creature of instinct, to a rational 
and intelligent being. But when first I opened a book, after so long an 
abstinence from all mental nourishment,—Oh it was rapture! no half-famished 
beggar regaled suddenly with food, ever seized on his repast with more hungry 
avidity."
"Let fortune turn which way it will," cried Monckton, "you may defy all its 
malice, while possessed of a spirit of enjoyment which nothing can subdue!"
"But were you not, Sir," said Cecilia, "as great an enthusiast the other day 
for your cottage, and for labour?"
"I was, madam; but there my philosophy was erroneous: in my ardour to fly from 
meanness and from dependence, I thought in labour and retirement I should find 
freedom and happiness; but I forgot that my body was not seasoned for such 
work, and considered not that a mind which had once been opened by knowledge, 
could ill endure the contraction of dark and perpetual ignorance. The approach, 
however, of winter, brought me acquainted with my mistake. It grew cold, it 
grew bleak; little guarded against the inclemency of the ——, I felt its 
severity in every limb, and missed a thousand indulgencies which in possession 
I had never valued. To rise at break of day, chill, freezing, and comfortless! 
no sun abroad, no fire at home! to go out in all weather to work, that work 
rough, coarse, and laborious!—unused to such hardships, I found I could not 
bear them, and, however unwillingly, was compelled to relinquish the attempt."
Breakfast now being over, he again arose to take leave.
"You are going, then, Sir," said Cecilia, "immediately to your friends?"
"No, madam," answered he hesitating, "not just this moment; to-morrow morning 
perhaps,—but it is now late, and I have business for the rest of the day."
"Ah, Mr Monckton!" cried Cecilia, "what mischief have you done by occasioning 
this delay!"
"This goodness, madam," said Belfield, "my sister can never sufficiently 
acknowledge. But I will own, that though, just now, in a warm moment, I felt 
eager to present myself to her and my mother, I rather wish, now I am cooler, 
to be saved the pain of telling them in person my situation. I mean, therefore, 
first to write to them."
"You will not fail, then, to see them to-morrow?"
"Certainly—I think not."
"Nay, but certainly you must not, for I shall call upon them to-day, and assure 
them they may expect you. Can I soften your task of writing by giving them any 
message from you?"
"Ah, madam, have a care!" cried he; "this condescension to a poor author may be 
more dangerous than you have any suspicion! and before you have power to help 
yourself, you may see your name prefixed to the Dedication of some trumpery 
pamphlet!"
"I will run," cried she, "all risks; remember, therefore, you will be 
responsible for the performance of my promise."
"I will be sure," answered he, "not to forget what reflects so much honour upon 
myself."
Cecilia was satisfied by this assent, and he then went away.
"A strange flighty character!" cried Mr Monckton, "yet of uncommon capacity, 
and full of genius. Were he less imaginative, wild and eccentric, he has 
abilities for any station, and might fix and distinguish himself almost 
where-ever he pleased."
"I knew not," said Cecilia, "the full worth of steadiness and prudence till I 
knew this young man; for he has every thing else; talents the most striking, a 
love of virtue the most elevated, and manners the most pleasing; yet wanting 
steadiness and prudence, he can neither act with consistency nor prosper with 
continuance."
"He is well enough," said Lady Margaret, who had heard the whole argument in 
sullen taciturnity, "he is well enough, I say; and there comes no good from 
young women's being so difficult."
Cecilia, offended by a speech which implied a rude desire to dispose of her, 
went up stairs to her own room; and Mr Monckton, always enraged when young men 
and Cecilia were alluded to in the same sentence, retired to his library.
She then ordered a chair, and went to Portland-street, to fulfil what she had 
offered to Belfield, and to revive his mother and sister by the pleasure of the 
promised interview.
She found them together: and her intelligence being of equal consequence to 
both, she did not now repine at the presence of Mrs Belfield. She made her 
communication with the most cautious attention to their characters, softening 
the ill she had to relate with respect to Belfield's present way of living, by 
endeavouring to awaken affection and joy from the prospect of the approaching 
meeting. She counselled them as much as possible to restrain their chagrin at 
his misfortunes, which he would but construe into reproach of his ill 
management; and she represented that when once he was restored to his family, 
he might almost imperceptibly be led into some less wild and more profitable 
scheme of business.
When she had told all she thought proper to relate, kindly interspersing her 
account with the best advice and best comfort she could suggest, she made an 
end of her visit; for the affliction of Mrs Belfield upon hearing the actual 
situation of her son, was so clamorous and unappeaseable, that, little 
wondering at Belfield's want of courage to encounter it, and having no 
opportunity in such a storm to console the soft Henrietta, whose tears flowed 
abundantly that her brother should thus be fallen, she only promised before she 
left town to see her again, and beseeching Mrs Belfield to moderate her 
concern, was glad to leave the house, where her presence had no power to quiet 
their distress.
She passed the rest of the day in sad reflections upon the meeting she was 
herself to have the next morning with Mr Delvile. She wished ardently to know 
whether his son was gone abroad, and whether Mrs Delvile was recovered, whose 
health, in her own letter, was mentioned in terms the most melancholy: yet 
neither of these enquiries could she even think of making, since reasonably, 
without them, apprehensive of some reproach.





