
Cecilia was now left in a state of perturbation that was hardly to be endured. 
The contempt with which she had been treated during the whole visit was nothing 
short of insult, but the accusations with which it was concluded did not more 
irritate than astonish her.
That some strange prejudice had been taken against her, even more than belonged 
to her connection with young Delvile, the message brought her by Dr Lyster had 
given her reason to suppose: what that prejudice was she now knew, though how 
excited she was still ignorant; but she found Mr Delvile had been informed she 
had taken up money of a Jew, without having heard it was for Mr Harrel, and 
that he had been acquainted with her visits in Portland-street, without seeming 
to know Mr Belfield had a sister. Two charges such as these, so serious in 
their nature, and so destructive of her character, filled her with horror and 
consternation, and even somewhat served to palliate his illiberal and injurious 
behaviour.
But how reports thus false and thus disgraceful should be raised, and by what 
dark work of slander and malignity they had been spread, remained a doubt 
inexplicable. They could not, she was certain, be the mere rumour of chance, 
since in both the assertions there was some foundation of truth, however 
cruelly perverted, or basely over-charged.
This led her to consider how few people there were not only who had interest, 
but who had power to propagate such calumnies; even her acquaintance with the 
Belfields she remembered not ever mentioning, for she knew none of their 
friends, and none of her own knew them. How, then, should it be circulated, 
that she "visited often at the house?" however be invented that it was from her 
"attention to the young man?" Henrietta, she was sure, was too good and too 
innocent to be guilty of such perfidy; and the young man himself had always 
shewn a modesty and propriety that manifested his total freedom from the vanity 
of such a suspicion, and an elevation of sentiment that would have taught him 
to scorn the boast, even if he believed the partiality.
The mother, however, had neither been so modest nor so rational; she had openly 
avowed her opinion that Cecilia was in love with her son; and as that son, by 
never offering himself, had never been refused, her opinion had received no 
check of sufficient force, for a mind so gross and literal, to change it.
This part, therefore, of the charge she gave to Mrs Belfield, whose officious 
and loquacious forwardness she concluded had induced her to narrate her 
suspicions, till, step by step, they had reached Mr Delvile.
But though able, by the probability of this conjecture, to account for the 
report concerning Belfield, the whole affair of the debt remained a difficulty 
not to be solved. Mr Harrel, his wife, Mr Arnott, the Jew and Mr Monckton, were 
the only persons to whom the transaction was known; and though from five, a 
secret, in the course of so many months, might easily be supposed likely to 
transpire, those five were so particularly bound to silence, not only for her 
interest but their own, that it was not unreasonable to believe it as safe 
among them all, as if solely consigned to one. For herself, she had revealed it 
to no creature but Mr Monckton; not even to Delvile; though, upon her 
consenting to marry him, he had an undoubted right to be acquainted with the 
true state of her affairs; but such had been the hurry, distress, confusion and 
irresolution of her mind at that period, that this whole circumstance had been 
driven from it entirely, and she had, since, frequently blamed herself for such 
want of recollection. Mr Harrel, for a thousand reasons, she was certain had 
never named it; and had the communication come from his widow or from Mr 
Arnott, the motives would have been related as well as the debt, and she had 
been spared the reproach of contracting it for purposes of her own 
extravagance. The Jew, indeed, was, to her, under no obligation of secrecy, but 
he had an obligation far more binding,—he was tied to himself.
A suspicion now arose in her mind which made it thrill with horror; "good God! 
she exclaimed, can Mr Monckton—-"
She stopt, even to herself;—she checked the idea;—she drove it hastily from 
her;—she was certain it was false and cruel,—she hated herself for having 
started it.
"No," cried she, "he is my friend, the confirmed friend of many years, my 
well-wisher from childhood, my zealous counsellor and assistant almost from my 
birth to this hour:—such perfidy from him would not even be human!"
Yet still her perplexity was undiminished; the affair was undoubtedly known, 
and it only could be known by the treachery of some one entrusted with it: and 
however earnestly her generosity combated her rising suspicions, she could not 
wholly quell them; and Mr Monckton's strange aversion to the Delviles, his 
earnestness to break off her connexion with them, occurred to her remembrance, 
and haunted her perforce with surmises to his disadvantage.
That gentleman, when he came home, found her in this comfortless and 
fluctuating state, endeavouring to form conjectures upon what had happened, yet 
unable to succeed, but by suggestions which one moment excited her abhorrence 
of him, and the next of herself.
He enquired, with his usual appearance of easy friendliness, into what had 
passed with her two guardians, and how she had settled her affairs. She 
answered without hesitation all his questions, but her manner was cold and 
reserved, though her communication was frank.
This was not unheeded by Mr Monckton, who, after a short time, begged to know 
if any thing had disturbed her.
Cecilia, ashamed of her doubts, though unable to get rid of them, then 
endeavoured to brighten up, and changed the subject to the difficulties she had 
had to encounter from the obstinacy of Mr Briggs.
Mr Monckton for a while humoured this evasion; but when, by her own exertion, 
her solemnity began to wear off, he repeated his interrogatory, and would not 
be satisfied without an answer.
Cecilia, earnest that surmises so injurious should be removed, then honestly, 
but without comments, related the scene which had just past between Mr Delvile 
and herself.
No comments were, however, wanting to explain to Mr Monckton the change of her 
behaviour. "I see," he cried hastily, "what you cannot but suspect; and I will 
go myself to Mr Delvile, and insist upon his clearing me."
Cecilia, shocked to have thus betrayed what was passing within her, assured him 
his vindication required not such a step, and begged he would counsel her how 
to discover this treachery, without drawing from her concern at it a conclusion 
so offensive to himself.
He was evidently, however, and greatly disturbed; he declared his own wonder 
equal to hers how the affair had been betrayed, expressed the warmest 
indignation at the malevolent insinuations against her conduct, and lamented 
with mingled acrimony and grief, that there should exist even the possibility 
of casting the odium of such villainy upon himself.
Cecilia, distressed, perplexed, and ashamed at once, again endeavoured to 
appease him, and though a lurking doubt obstinately clung to her understanding, 
the purity of her own principles, and the softness of her heart, pleaded 
strongly for his innocence, and urged her to detest her suspicion, though to 
conquer it they were unequal.
"It is true," said he, with an air ingenuous though mortified, "I dislike the 
Delviles, and have always disliked them; they appear to me a jealous, 
vindictive, and insolent race, and I should have thought I betrayed the 
faithful regard I professed for you, had I concealed my opinion when I saw you 
in danger of forming an alliance with them; I spoke to you, therefore, with 
honest zeal, thoughtless of any enmity I might draw upon myself; but though it 
was an interference from which I hoped, by preventing the connection, to 
contribute to your happiness, it was not with a design to stop it at the 
expence of your character,—a design black, horrible, and diabolic! a design 
which must be formed by a Daemon, but which even a Daemon could never, I think, 
execute!"
The candour of this speech, in which his aversion to the Delviles was openly 
acknowledged, and rationally justified, somewhat quieted the suspicions of 
Cecilia, which far more anxiously sought to be confuted than confirmed: she 
began, therefore, to conclude that some accident, inexplicable as unfortunate, 
had occasioned the partial discovery to Mr Delvile, by which her own goodness 
proved the source of her defamation: and though something still hung upon her 
mind that destroyed that firm confidence she had hitherto felt in the 
friendship of Mr Monckton, she held it utterly unjust to condemn him without 
proof, which she was not more unable to procure, than to satisfy herself with 
any reason why so perfidiously he should calumniate her.
Comfortless, however, and tormented with conjectures equally vague and 
afflicting, she could only clear him to be lost in perplexity, she could only 
accuse him to be penetrated with horror. She endeavoured to suspend her 
judgment till time should develop the mystery, and only for the present sought 
to finish her business and leave London.
She renewed, therefore, again, the subject of Mr Briggs, and told him how vain 
had been her effort to settle with him. Mr Monckton instantly offered his 
services in assisting her, and the next morning they went together to his 
house, where, after an obstinate battle, they gained a complete victory: Mr 
Briggs gave up all his accounts, and, in a few days, by the active interference 
of Mr Monckton, her affairs were wholly taken out of his hands. He stormed, and 
prophesied all ill to Cecilia, but it was not to any purpose; he was so 
disagreeable to her, by his manners, and so unintelligible to her in matters of 
business, that she was happy to have done with him; even though, upon 
inspecting his accounts, they were all found clear and exact, and his desire to 
retain his power over her fortune, proved to have no other motive than a love 
of money so potent, that to manage it, even for another, gave him a 
satisfaction he knew not how to relinquish.
Mr Monckton, who, though a man of pleasure, understood business perfectly well, 
now instructed and directed her in making a general arrangement of her affairs. 
The estate which devolved to her from her uncle, and which was all in landed 
property, she continued to commit to the management of the steward who was 
employed in his life-time; and her own fortune from her father, which was all 
in the stocks, she now diminished to nothing by selling out to pay Mr Monckton 
the principal and interest which she owed him, and by settling with her 
Bookseller.
While these matters were transacting, which, notwithstanding her eagerness to 
leave town, could not be brought into such a train as to permit her absence in 
less than a week, she passed her time chiefly alone. Her wishes all inclined 
her to bestow it upon Henrietta, but the late attack of Mr Delvile had 
frightened her from keeping up that connection, since however carefully she 
might confine it to the daughter, Mrs Belfield, she was certain, would impute 
it all to the son.
That attack rested upon her mind, in defiance of all her endeavours to banish 
it; the contempt with which it was made seemed intentionally offensive, as if 
he had been happy to derive from her supposed ill conduct, a right to triumph 
over as well as reject her. She concluded, also, that Delvile would be informed 
of these calumnies, yet she judged his generosity by her own, and was therefore 
convinced he would not credit them: but what chiefly at this time encreased her 
sadness and uneasiness, was the mention of Mrs Delvile's broken constitution 
and ruined health. She had always preserved for that lady the most affectionate 
respect, and could not consider herself as the cause of her sufferings, without 
feeling the utmost concern, however conscious she had not wilfully occasioned 
them.
Nor was this scene the only one by which her efforts to forget this family were 
defeated; her watchful monitor, Albany, failed not again to claim her promise; 
and though Mr Monckton earnestly exhorted her not to trust herself out with 
him, she preferred a little risk to the keenness of his reproaches, and the 
weather being good on the morning that he called, she consented to accompany 
him in his rambles: only charging her footman to follow where-ever they went, 
and not to fail enquiring for her if she stayed long out of his sight. These 
precautions were rather taken to satisfy Mr Monckton than herself, who, having 
now procured intelligence of the former disorder of his intellects, was fearful 
of some extravagance, and apprehensive for her safety.
He took her to a miserable house in a court leading into Piccadilly, where, up 
three pair of stairs, was a wretched woman ill in bed, while a large family of 
children were playing in the room.
"See here," cried he, "what human nature can endure! look at that poor wretch, 
distracted with torture, yet lying in all this noise! unable to stir in her 
bed, yet without any assistant! suffering the pangs of acute disease, yet 
wanting the necessaries of life!"
Cecilia went up to the bed-side, and enquired more particularly into the 
situation of the invalid; but finding she could hardly speak from pain, she 
sent for the woman of the house, who kept a Green Grocer's shop on the ground 
floor, and desired her to hire a nurse for her sick lodger, to call all the 
children down stairs, and to send for an apothecary, whose bill she promised to 
pay. She then gave her some money to get what necessaries might be wanted, and 
said she would come again in two days to see how they went on.
Albany, who listened to these directions with silent, yet eager attention, now 
clasped both his hands with a look of rapture, and exclaimed "Virtue yet 
lives,—and I have found her?"
Cecilia, proud of such praise, and ambitious to deserve it, chearfully said, 
"where, Sir, shall we go now?"
"Home;" answered he with an aspect the most benign; "I will not wear out thy 
pity by rendering woe familiar to it."
Cecilia, though at this moment more disposed for acts of charity than for 
business or for pleasure, remembered that her fortune however large was not 
unlimited, and would not press any further bounty for objects she knew not, 
certain that occasions and claimants, far beyond her ability of answering, 
would but too frequently arise among those with whom she was more connected, 
she therefore yielded herself to his direction, and returned to Soho-Square.
Again, however, he failed not to call the time she had appointed for 
re-visiting the invalid, to whom, with much gladness, he conducted her.
The poor woman, whose disease was a rheumatic fever, was already much better; 
she had been attended by an apothecary who had given her some alleviating 
medicine; she had a nurse at her bedside, and the room being cleared of the 
children, she had had the refreshment of some sleep.
She was now able to raise her head, and make her acknowledgments to her 
benefactress; but not a little was the surprise of Cecilia, when, upon looking 
in her face, she said, "Ah, madam, I have seen you before!"
Cecilia, who had not the smallest recollection of her, in return desired to 
know when, or where?
"When you were going to be married, madam, I was the Pew-Opener at —— 
Church."
Cecilia started with secret horror, and involuntarily retreated from the bed; 
while Albany with a look of astonishment exclaimed, "Married!—why, then, is 
it unknown?"
"Ask me not!" cried she, hastily; "it is all a mistake."
"Poor thing!" cried he, "this, then, is the string thy nerves endure not to 
have touched! sooner will I expire than a breath of mine shall make it vibrate! 
Oh sacred be thy sorrow, for thou canst melt at that of the indigent!"
Cecilia then made a few general enquiries, and heard that the poor woman, who 
was a widow, had been obliged to give up her office, from the frequent attacks 
which she suffered of the rheumatism; that she had received much assistance 
both from the Rector and the Curate of —— Church, but her continual 
illness, with the largeness of her family, kept her distressed in spite of all 
help.
Cecilia promised to consider what she could do for her, and then giving her 
more money, returned to Lady Margaret's.
Albany, who found that the unfortunate recollection of the Pew-Opener had 
awakened in his young pupil a melancholy train of reflections, seemed now to 
compassionate the sadness which hitherto he had reproved, and walking silently 
by her side till she came to Soho-Square, said in accents of kindness, "Peace 
light upon thy head, and dissipate thy woes!" and left her.
"Ah when!" cried she to herself, "if thus they are to be revived for-ever!"
Mr Monckton, who observed that something had greatly affected her, now 
expostulated warmly against Albany and his wild schemes; "You trifle with your 
own happiness," he cried, "by witnessing these scenes of distress, and you will 
trifle away your fortune upon projects you can never fulfil: the very air in 
those miserable houses is unwholesome for you to breathe; you will soon be 
affected with some of the diseases to which you so uncautiously expose 
yourself, and while not half you give in charity will answer the purpose you 
wish, you will be plundered by cheats and sharpers till you have nothing left 
to bestow. You must be more considerate for yourself, and not thus governed by 
Albany, whose insanity is but partially cured, and whose projects are so 
boundless, that the whole capital of the East India Company would not suffice 
to fulfil them."
Cecilia, though she liked not the severity of this remonstrance, acknowledged 
there was some truth in it, and promised to be discreet, and take the reins 
into her own hands.
There remained for her, however, no other satisfaction; and the path which had 
thus been pointed out to her, grew more and more alluring every step. Her old 
friends, the poor Hills, now occurred to her memory, and she determined to see 
herself in what manner they went on.
The scene which this enquiry presented to her, was by no means calculated to 
strengthen Mr Monckton's doctrine, for the prosperity in which she found this 
little family, amply rewarded the liberality she had shewn to it, and proved an 
irresistible encouragement to similar actions. Mrs Hill wept for joy in 
recounting how well she succeeded, and Cecilia, delighted by the power of 
giving such pleasure, forgot all cautions and promises in the generosity which 
she displayed. She paid Mrs Roberts the arrears that were due to her, she 
discharged all that was owing for the children who had been put to school, 
desired they might still be sent to it solely at her expense, and gave the 
mother a sum of money to be laid out in presents for them all.
To perform her promise with the Pew Opener was however more difficult; her ill 
health, and the extreme youth of her children making her utterly helpless: but 
these were not considerations for Cecilia to desert her, but rather motives for 
regarding her as more peculiarly an object of charity. She found she had once 
been a clear starcher, and was a tolerable plain work-woman; she resolved, 
therefore, to send her into the country, where she hoped to be able to get her 
some business, and knew that at least, she could help her, if unsuccessful, and 
see that her children were brought up to useful employments. The woman herself 
was enchanted at the plan, and firmly persuaded the country air would restore 
her health. Cecilia told her only to wait till she was well enough to travel, 
and promised, in the mean time, to look out some little habitation for her. She 
then gave her money to pay her bills, and for her journey, and writing a full 
direction where she would hear of her at Bury, took leave of her till that time.
These magnificent donations and designs, being communicated to Albany, seemed a 
renovation to him of youth, spirit, and joy! while their effect upon Mr 
Monckton resembled an annihilation of all three! to see money thus sported 
away, which he had long considered as his own, to behold those sums which he 
had destined for his pleasures, thus lavishly bestowed upon beggars, excited a 
rage he could with difficulty conceal, and an uneasiness he could hardly 
endure; and he languished, he sickened for the time, when he might put a period 
to such romantic proceedings.
Such were the only occupations which interrupted the solitude of Cecilia, 
except those which were given to her by actual business; and the moment her 
affairs were in so much forwardness that they could be managed by letters, she 
prepared for returning into the country. She acquainted Lady Margaret and Mr 
Monckton with her design, and gave orders to her servants to be ready to set 
off the next day.
Mr Monckton made not any opposition, and refused himself the satisfaction of 
accompanying her: and Lady Margaret, whose purpose was now answered, and who 
wished to be in the country herself, determined to follow her.





