
This matter being settled at breakfast, Cecilia, having but one day more to 
spend in London, knew not how to let it pass without taking leave of Henrietta, 
though she chose not again to expose herself to the forward insinuations of her 
mother; she sent her, therefore, a short note, begging to see her at Lady 
Margaret's, and acquainting her that the next day she was going out of town.
Henrietta returned the following answer.
To Miss Beverley.
Madam,—My mother is gone to market, and I must not go out without her leave; 
I have run to the door at every knock this whole week in hopes you were coming, 
and my heart has jumpt at every coach that has gone through the street. Dearest 
lady, why did you tell me you would come? I should not have thought of such a 
great honour if you had not put it in my head. And now I have got the use of a 
room where I can often be alone for two or three hours together. And so I shall 
this morning, if it was possible my dear Miss Beverley could come. But I don't 
mean to be teasing, and I would not be impertinent or encroaching for the 
world; but only the thing is I have a great deal to say to you, and if you was 
not so rich a lady, and so much above me, I am sure I should love you better 
than any body in the whole world, almost; and now I dare say I shan't see you 
at all; for it rains very hard, and my mother, I know, will be sadly angry if I 
ask to go in a coach. O dear! I don't know what I can do! for it will half 
break my heart, if my dear Miss Beverley should go out of town, and I not see 
her!—I am, Madam, with the greatest respectfulness, your most humble servant,
HENRIETTA BELFIELD.
This artless remonstrance, joined to the intelligence that she could see her 
alone, made Cecilia instantly order a chair, and go herself to Portland-street: 
for she found by this letter there was much doubt if she could otherwise see 
her, and the earnestness of Henrietta made her now not endure to disappoint 
her. "She has much," cried she, "to say to me, and I will no longer refuse to 
hear her; she shall unbosom to me her gentle heart, for we have now nothing to 
fear from each other. She promises herself pleasure from the communication, and 
doubtless it must be some relief to her. Oh were there any friendly bosom, in 
which I might myself confide!—happier Henrietta! less fearful of thy pride, 
less tenacious of thy dignity! thy sorrows at least seek the consolation of 
sympathy,—mine, alas! fettered by prudence, must fly it!"
She was shewn into the parlour, which she had the pleasure to find empty; and, 
in an instant, the warm-hearted Henrietta was in her arms. "This is sweet of 
you indeed," cried she, "for I did not know how to ask it, though it rains so 
hard I could not have walked to you, and I don't know what I should have done, 
if you had gone away and quite forgot me."
She then took her into the back parlour, which she said they had lately hired, 
and, as it was made but little use of, she had it almost entirely to herself.
There had passed a sad scene, she told her, at the meeting with her brother, 
though now they were a little more comfortable; yet, her mother, she was sure, 
would never be at rest till he got into some higher way of life; "And, indeed, 
I have some hopes," she continued, "that we shall be able by and bye to do 
something better for him; for he has got one friend in the world, yet; thank 
God, and such a noble friend!—indeed I believe he can do whatever he pleases 
for him,—that is I mean I believe if he was to ask any thing for him, there's 
nobody would deny him. And this is what I wanted to talk to you about."—
Cecilia, who doubted not but she meant Delvile, scarce knew how to press the 
subject, though she came with no other view: Henrietta, however, too eager to 
want solicitation, went on.
"But the question is whether we shall be able to prevail upon my brother to 
accept any thing, for he grows more and more unwilling to be obliged, and the 
reason is, that being poor, he is afraid, I believe, people should think he 
wants to beg of them: though if they knew him as well as I do, they would not 
long think that, for I am sure he would a great deal rather be starved to 
death. But indeed, to say the truth, I am afraid he has been sadly to blame in 
this affair, and quarrelled when there was no need to be affronted; for I have 
seen a gentleman who knows a great deal better than my brother what people 
should do, and he says he took every thing wrong that was done, all the time he 
was at Lord Vannelt's."
"And how does this gentleman know it?"
"O because he went himself to enquire about it; for he knows Lord Vannelt very 
well, and it was by his means my brother came acquainted with him. And this 
gentleman would not have wished my brother to be used ill any more than I 
should myself, so I am sure I may believe what he says. But my poor brother, 
not being a lord himself, thought every body meant to be rude to him, and 
because he knew he was poor, he suspected they all behaved disrespectfully to 
him. But this gentleman gave me his word that every body liked him and esteemed 
him, and if he would not have been so suspicious, they would all have done any 
thing for him in the world."
"You know this gentleman very well, then?"
"O no, madam!" she answered hastily, "I don't know him at all! he only comes 
here to see my brother; it would be very impertinent for me to call him an 
acquaintance of mine."
"Was it before your brother, then, he held this conversation with you?"
"O no, my brother would have been affronted with him, too, if he had! but he 
called here to enquire for him at the time when he was lost to us, and my 
mother quite went down upon her knees to him to beg him to go to Lord 
Vannelt's, and make excuses for him, if he had not behaved properly: but if my 
brother was to know this, he would hardly speak to her again! so when this 
gentleman came next, I begged him not to mention it, for my mother happened to 
be out, and so I saw him alone."
"And did he stay with you long?"
"No, ma'am, a very short time indeed; but I asked him questions all the while, 
and kept him as long as I could, that I might hear all he had to say about my 
brother."
"Have you never seen him since?"
"No, ma'am, not once! I suppose he does not know my brother is come back to us. 
Perhaps when he does, he will call."
"Do you wish him to call?"
"Me?" cried she, blushing, "a little;—sometimes I do;—for my brother's 
sake."
"For your brother's sake! Ah my dear Henrietta! but tell me,—or don't tell me 
if you had rather not,—did I not once see you kissing a letter? perhaps it 
was from this same noble friend?"
"It was not a letter, madam," said she, looking down, "it was only the cover of 
one to my brother."
"The cover of a letter only!—and that to your brother!—is it possible you 
could so much value it?"
"Ah madam! You, who are always used to the good and the wise, who see no other 
sort of people but those in high life, you can have no notion how they strike 
those that they are new to!—but I who see them seldom, and who live with 
people so very unlike them—Oh you cannot guess how sweet to me is every thing 
that belongs to them! whatever has but once been touched by their hands, I 
should like to lock up, and keep for ever! though if I was used to them, as you 
are, perhaps I might think less of them."
Alas! thought Cecilia, who by them knew she only meant him, little indeed would 
further intimacy protect you!
"We are all over-ready," continued Henrietta, "to blame others, and that is the 
way I have been doing all this time myself; but I don't blame my poor brother 
now for living so with the great as I used to do, for now I have seen a little 
more of the world, I don't wonder any longer at his behaviour: for I know how 
it is, and I see that those who have had good educations, and kept great 
company, and mixed with the world,—O it is another thing!—they seem quite a 
different species!—they are so gentle, so soft-mannered! nothing comes from 
them but what is meant to oblige! they seem as if they only lived to give 
pleasure to other people, and as if they never thought at all of themselves!"
"Ah Henrietta!" said Cecilia, shaking her head, "you have caught the enthusiasm 
of your brother, though you so long condemned it! Oh have a care lest, like him 
also, you find it as pernicious as it is alluring!"
"There, is no danger for me, madam," answered she, "for the people I so much 
admire are quite out of my reach. I hardly ever even see them; and perhaps it 
may so happen I may see them no more!"
"The people?" said Cecilia, smiling, "are there, then, many you so much 
distinguish?"
"Oh no indeed!" cried she, eagerly, "there is only one! there can be—I mean 
there are only a few—" she checked herself, and stopt.
"Whoever you admire," cried Cecilia, "your admiration cannot but honour: yet 
indulge it not too far, lest it should wander from your heart to your peace, 
and make you wretched for life."
"Ah madam!—I see you know who is the particular person I was thinking of! but 
indeed you are quite mistaken if you suppose any thing bad of me!"
"Bad of you!" cried Cecilia, embracing her, "I scarce think so well of any one!"
"But I mean, madam, if you think I forget he is so much above me. But indeed I 
never do; for I only admire him for his goodness to my brother, and never think 
of him at all, but just by way of comparing him, sometimes, to the other people 
that I see, because he makes me hate them so, that I wish I was never to see 
them again."
"His acquaintance, then," said Cecilia, "has done you but an ill office, and 
happy it would be for you could you forget you had ever made it."
"O, I shall never do that! for the more I think of him, the more I am out of 
humour with every body else! O Miss Beverley! we have a sad acquaintance 
indeed! I'm sure I don't wonder my brother was so ashamed of them. They are all 
so rude, and so free, and put one so out of countenance,—O how different is 
this person you are thinking of! he would not distress anybody, or make one 
ashamed for all the world! You only are like him! always gentle, always 
obliging!—sometimes I think you must be his sister—once, too, I heard—but 
that was contradicted."
A deep sigh escaped Cecilia at this speech; she guessed too well what she might 
have heard, and she knew too well how it might be contradicted.
"Surely, you cannot be unhappy, Miss Beverley!" said Henrietta, with a look of 
mingled surprise and concern.
"I have much, I own," cried Cecilia, assuming more chearfulness, "to be 
thankful for, and I endeavour not to forget it."
"O how often do I think," cried Henrietta, "that you, madam, are the happiest 
person in the world! with every thing at your own disposal,—with every body 
in love with you, with all the money that you can wish for, and so much 
sweetness that nobody can envy you it! with power to keep just what company you 
please, and every body proud to be one of the number!—Oh if I could chuse who 
I would be, I should sooner say Miss Beverley than any princess in the world!"
Ah, thought Cecilia, if such is my situation,—how cruel that by one dreadful 
blow all its happiness should be thrown away!
"Were I a rich lady, like you," continued Henrietta, "and quite in my own 
power, then, indeed, I might soon think of nothing but those people that I 
admire! and that makes me often wonder that you, madam, who are just such 
another as himself—but then, indeed, you may see so many of the same sort, 
that just this one may not so much strike you: and for that reason I hope with 
all my heart that he will never be married as long as he lives, for as he must 
take some lady in just such high life as his own, I should always be afraid 
that she would never love him as she ought to do!"
He need not now be single, thought Cecilia, were that all he had cause to 
apprehend!
"I often think," added Henrietta, "that the rich would be as much happier for 
marrying the poor, as the poor for marrying the rich, for then they would take 
somebody that would try to deserve their kindness, and now they only take those 
that know they have a right to it. Often and often have I thought so about this 
very gentleman! and sometimes when I have been in his company, and seen his 
civility and his sweetness, I have fancied I was rich and grand myself, and it 
has quite gone out of my head that I was nothing but poor Henrietta Belfield!"
"Did he, then," cried Cecilia a little alarmed, "ever seek to ingratiate 
himself into your favour?"
"No, never! but when treated with so much softness, 'tis hard always to 
remember one's meanness! You, madam, have no notion of that task: no more had I 
myself till lately, for I cared not who was high, nor who was low: but now, 
indeed, I must own I have some times wished myself richer! yet he assumes so 
little, that at other times, I have almost forgot all distance between us, and 
even thought—Oh foolish thought!—
"Tell it, sweet Henrietta, however!"
"I will tell you, madam, every thing! for my heart has been bursting to open 
itself, and nobody have I dared trust. I have thought, then, I have sometimes 
thought,—my true affection, my faithful fondness, my glad obedience,—might 
make him, if he did but know them, happier in me than in a greater lady!"
"Indeed," cried Cecilia, extremely affected by this plaintive tenderness, "I 
believe it—and were I him, I could not, I think, hesitate a moment in my 
choice!"
Henrietta now, hearing her mother coming in, made a sign to her to be silent; 
but Mrs Belfield had not been an instant in the passage, before a thundering 
knocking at the street-door occasioned it to be instantly re-opened. A servant 
then enquired if Mrs Belfield was at home, and being answered by herself in the 
affirmative, a chair was brought into the house.
But what was the astonishment of Cecilia, when, in another moment, she heard 
from the next parlour the voice of Mr Delvile senior, saying, "Your servant, 
ma'am; Mrs Belfield, I presume?"
There was no occasion, now, to make a sign to her of silence, for her own 
amazement was sufficient to deprive her of speech.
"Yes, Sir," answered Mrs Belfield; "but I suppose, Sir, you are some gentleman 
to my son."
"No, madam," he returned, "my business is with yourself."
Cecilia now recovering from her surprise, determined to hasten unnoticed out of 
the house, well knowing that to be seen in it would be regarded as a 
confirmation of all that he had asserted. She whispered, therefore, to 
Henrietta, that she must instantly run away, but, upon softly opening the door 
leading to the passage, she found Mr Delvile's chairmen, and a footman there in 
waiting.
She closed it again, irresolute what to do: but after a little deliberation, 
she concluded to out-stay him, as she was known to all his servants, who would 
not fail to mention seeing her; and a retreat so private was worse than any 
other risk. A chair was also in waiting for herself, but it was a hackney one, 
and she could not be known by it; and her footman she had fortunately 
dismissed, as he had business to transact for her journey next day.
Mean-while the thinness of the partition between the two parlours made her 
hearing every word that was said unavoidable.
"I am sure, Sir, I shall be very willing to oblige you," Mrs Belfield answered; 
"but pray, Sir, what's your name?"
"My name, ma'am," he replied, in a rather elevated voice, "I am seldom obliged 
to announce myself; nor is there any present necessity I should make it known. 
It is sufficient I assure you, you are speaking to no very common person, and 
probably to one you will have little chance to meet with again."
"But how can I tell your business, Sir, if I don't so much as know your name?"
"My business, madam, I mean to tell myself; your affair is only to hear it. I 
have some questions, indeed, to ask, which I must trouble you to answer, but 
they will sufficiently explain themselves to prevent any difficulty upon your 
part. There is no need, therefore, of any introductory ceremonial."
"Well, Sir," said Mrs Belfield, wholly insensible of this ambiguous greatness, 
"if you mean to make your name a secret."
"Few names, I believe, ma'am," cried he, haughtily, "have less the advantage of 
secrecy than mine! on the contrary, this is but one among a very few houses in 
this town to which my person would not immediately announce it. That, however, 
is immaterial; and you will be so good as to rest satisfied with my assurances, 
that the person with whom you are now conversing, will prove no disgrace to 
your character."
Mrs Belfield, overpowered, though hardly knowing, with what, only said he was 
very welcome, and begged him to sit down.
"Excuse me, ma'am," he answered, "My business is but of a moment, and my 
avocations are too many to suffer my infringing that time. You say you have a 
son; I have heard of him, also, somewhere before; pray will you give me leave 
to enquire—I don't mean to go deep into the matter,—but particular family 
occurrences make it essential for me to know,—whether there is not a young 
person of rather a capital fortune, to whom he is supposed to make proposals?"
"Lack-a-day, no, Sir!" answered Mrs Belfield, to the infinite relief of 
Cecilia, who instantly concluded this question referred to herself.
"I beg your pardon, then; good morning to you, ma'am," said Mr Delvile, in a 
tone that spoke his disappointment; but added "And there is no such young 
person, you say, who favours his pretensions?"
"Dear Sir," cried she, "why there's nobody he'll so much as put the question 
to! there's a young lady at this very time, a great fortune, that has as much a 
mind to him, I tell him, as any man need desire to see; but there's no making 
him think it! though he has been brought up at the university, and knows more 
about all the things, or as much, as any body in the king's dominions."
"O, then," cried Mr Delvile, in a voice of far more complacency, "it is not on 
the side of the young woman that the difficulty seems to rest?"
"Lord, no, Sir! he might have had her again and again only for asking! She came 
after him ever so often; but being brought up, as I said, at the university, he 
thought he knew better than me, and so my preaching was all as good as lost 
upon him."
The consternation of Cecilia at these speeches could by nothing be equalled but 
by the shame of Henrietta, who, though she knew not to whom her mother made 
them, felt all the disgrace and the shock of them herself.
"I suppose, Sir," continued Mrs Belfield, "you know my son?"
"No, ma'am, my acquaintance is—not very universal."
"Then, Sir, you are no judge how well he might make his own terms. And as to 
this young lady, she found him out, Sir, when not one of his own natural 
friends could tell where in the world he was gone! She was the first, Sir, to 
come and tell me news of him though I was his own mother! Love, Sir, is 
prodigious for quickness! it can see, I sometimes think, through bricks and 
mortar. Yet all this would not do, he was so obstinate not to take the hint!"
Cecilia now felt so extremely provoked, she was upon the point of bursting in 
upon them to make her own vindication; but as her passions, though they tried 
her reason never conquered it, she restrained herself by considering that to 
issue forth from a room in that house, would do more towards strengthening what 
was thus boldly asserted, than all her protestations could have chance to 
destroy.
"And as to young ladies themselves," continued Mrs Belfield, "they know no more 
how to make their minds known than a baby does: so I suppose he'll shilly 
shally till somebody else will cry snap, and take her. It is but a little while 
ago that it was all the report she was to have young Mr Delvile, one of her 
guardian's sons."
"I am sorry report was so impertinent," cried Mr Delvile, with much 
displeasure; "young Mr Delvile is not to be disposed of with so little 
ceremony; he knows better what is due to his family."
Cecilia here blushed from indignation, and Henrietta sighed from despondency.
"Lord, Sir," answered Mrs Belfield, "what should his family do better? I never 
heard they were any so rich, and I dare say the old gentleman, being her 
guardian, took care to put his son enough in her way, however it came about 
that they did not make a match of it: for as to old Mr Delvile, all the world 
says—-"
"All the world takes a very great liberty," angrily interrupted Mr Delvile, "in 
saying any thing about him: and you will excuse my informing you that a person 
of his rank and consideration, is not lightly to be mentioned upon every little 
occasion that occurs."
"Lord, Sir," cried Mrs Belfield, somewhat surprised at this unexpected 
prohibition, "I don't care for my part if I never mention the old gentleman's 
name again! I never heard any good of him in my life, for they say he's as 
proud as Lucifer, and nobody knows what it's of, for they say—"
"They say?" cried he, firing with rage, "and who are they? be so good as inform 
me that?"
"Lord, every body, Sir! it's his common character."
"Then every body is extremely indecent," speaking very loud, "to pay no more 
respect to one of the first families in England. It is a licentiousness that 
ought by no means to be suffered with impunity."
Here, the street-door being kept open by the servants in waiting, a new step 
was heard in the passage, which Henrietta immediately knowing, turned, with 
uplifted hands to Cecilia, and whispered, "How unlucky! it's my brother! I 
thought he would not have returned till night!"
"Surely he will not come in here?" re-whispered Cecilia.
But, at the same moment, he opened the door, and entered the room. He was 
immediately beginning an apology, and starting back, but Henrietta catching him 
by the arm, told him in a low voice, that she had made use of his room because 
she had thought him engaged for the day, but begged him to keep still and 
quiet, as the least noise would discover them.
Belfield then stopt; but the embarrassment of Cecilia was extreme; to find 
herself in his room after the speeches she had heard from his mother, and to 
continue with him in it by connivance, when she knew she had been represented 
as quite at his service, distressed and provoked her immeasurably; and she felt 
very angry with Henrietta for not sooner informing her whose apartment she had 
borrowed. Yet now to remove, and to be seen, was not to be thought of; she 
kept, therefore, fixed to her seat, though changing colour every moment from 
the variety of her emotions.
During this painful interruption she lost Mrs Belfield's next answer, and 
another speech or two from Mr Delvile, to whose own passion and loudness was 
owing Belfield's entering his room unheard: but the next voice that called 
their attention was that of Mr Hobson, who just then walked into the parlour.
"Why what's to do here?" cried he, facetiously, "nothing but chairs and livery 
servants! Why, ma'am, what is this your rout day? Sir your most humble servant. 
I ask pardon, but I did not know you at first. But come, suppose we were all to 
sit down? Sitting's as cheap as standing, and what I say is this; when a man's 
tired, it's more agreeable."
"Have you any thing further, ma'am," said Mr Delvile, with great solemnity, "to 
communicate to me?"
"No, Sir," said Mrs Belfield, rather angrily, "it's no business of mine to be 
communicating myself to a gentleman that I don't know the name of. Why, Mr 
Hobson, how come you to know the gentleman?"
"To know me!" repeated Mr Delvile, scornfully.
"Why I can't say much, ma'am," answered Mr Hobson, "as to my knowing the 
gentleman, being I have been in his company but once; and what I say is, to 
know a person if one leaves but a quart in a hogshead, it's two pints too much. 
That's my notion. But, Sir, that was but an ungain business at 'Squire 
Monckton's t'other morning. Every body was no-how, as one may say. But, Sir, if 
I may be so free, pray what is your private opinion of that old gentleman that 
talked so much out of the way?"
"My private opinion, Sir?"
"Yes, Sir; I mean if it's no secret, for as to a secret, I hold it's what no 
man has a right to enquire into, being of its own nature it's a thing not to be 
told. Now as to what I think myself, my doctrine is this; I am quite of the old 
gentleman's mind about some things, and about others I hold him to be quite 
wide of the mark. But as to talking in such a whisky frisky manner that nobody 
can understand him, why its tantamount to not talking at all, being he might as 
well hold his tongue. That's what I say. And then as to that other article, of 
abusing a person for not giving away all his lawful gains to every cripple in 
the streets, just because he happens to have but one leg, or one eye, or some 
such matter, why it's knowing nothing of business! it's what I call talking at 
random."
"When you have finished, Sir," said Mr Delvile, "you will be so good to let me 
know."
"I don't mean to intrude, Sir; that's not my way, so if you are upon 
business—"
"What else, Sir, could you suppose brought me hither? However, I by no means 
purpose any discussion. I have only a few words more to say to this 
gentlewoman, and as my time is not wholly inconsequential, I should not be 
sorry to have an early opportunity of being heard."
"I shall leave you with the lady directly, Sir; for I know business better than 
to interrupt it: but seeing chairs in the entry, my notion was I should see 
ladies in the parlour, not much thinking of gentlemen's going about in that 
manner, being I never did it myself. But I have nothing to offer against that; 
let every man have his own way; that's what I say. Only just let me ask the 
lady before I go, what's the meaning of my seeing two chairs in the entry, and 
only a person for one in the parlour? The gentleman, I suppose, did not come in 
both; ha! ha! ha!"
"Why now you put me in mind," said Mrs Belfield, "I saw a chair as soon as I 
come in; and I was just going to say who's here, when this gentleman's coming 
put it out of my head."
"Why this is what I call Hocus Pocus work!" said Mr Hobson; "but I shall make 
free to ask the chairmen who they are waiting for."
Mrs Belfield, however, anticipated him; for running into the passage, she 
angrily called out, "What do you do here, Misters? do you only come to be out 
of the rain? I'll have no stand made of my entry, I can tell you!"
"Why we are waiting for the lady," cried one of them.
"Waiting for a fiddlestick!" said Mrs Belfield; "here's no lady here, nor no 
company; so if you think I'll have my entry filled up by two hulking fellows 
for nothing, I shall shew you the difference. One's dirt enough of one's own, 
without taking people out of the streets to help one. Who do you think's to 
clean after you?"
"That's no business of ours; the lady bid us wait," answered the man.
Cecilia at this dispute could with pleasure have cast herself out of the window 
to avoid being discovered; but all plan of escape was too late; Mrs Belfield 
called aloud for her daughter, and then, returning to the front parlour, said, 
"I'll soon know if there's company come to my house without my knowing it!" and 
opened a door leading to the next room!
Cecilia, who had hitherto sat fixed to her chair, now hastily arose, but in a 
confusion too cruel for speech: Belfield, wondering even at his own situation, 
and equally concerned and surprised at her evident distress, had himself the 
feeling of a culprit, though without the least knowledge of any cause: and 
Henrietta, terrified at the prospect of her mother's anger, retreated as much 
as possible out of sight.
Such was the situation of the discovered, abashed, perplexed, and embarrassed! 
while that of the discoverers, far different, was bold, delighted, and 
triumphant!
"So!" cried Mrs Belfield, "why here's Miss Beverley!—in my son's back room!" 
winking at Mr Delvile.
"Why here's a lady, sure enough!" said Mr Hobson, "and just where she should 
be, and that is with a gentleman. Ha! ha! that's the right way, according to my 
notion! that's the true maxim for living agreeable."
"I came to see Miss Belfield," cried Cecilia, endeavouring, but vainly, to 
speak with composure, "and she brought me into this room."
"I am but this moment," cried Belfield, with eagerness, "returned home; and 
unfortunately broke into the room, from total ignorance of the honour which 
Miss Beverley did my sister."
These speeches, though both literally true, sounded, in the circumstances which 
brought them out, so much as mere excuses, that while Mr Delvile haughtily 
marked his incredulity by a motion of his chin, Mrs Belfield continued winking 
at him most significantly, and Mr Hobson, with still less ceremony, laughed 
aloud.
"I have nothing more, ma'am," said Mr Delvile to Mrs Belfield, "to enquire, for 
the few doubts with which I came to this house are now entirely satisfied. Good 
morning to you, ma'am."
"Give me leave, Sir," said Cecilia, advancing with more spirit, "to explain, in 
presence of those who can best testify my veracity, the real circumstances—"
"I would by no means occasion you such unnecessary trouble, ma'am," answered 
he, with an air at once exulting and pompous, "the situation in which I see you 
abundantly satisfies my curiosity, and saves me from the apprehension I was 
under of being again convicted of a mistake!"
He then made her a stiff bow, and went to his chair.
Cecilia, colouring deeply at this contemptuous treatment, coldly took leave of 
Henrietta, and courtsying to Mrs Belfield, hastened into the passage, to get 
into her own.
Henrietta was too much intimidated to speak, and Belfield was too delicate to 
follow her; Mr Hobson only said "The young lady seems quite dashed;" but Mrs 
Belfield pursued her with entreaties she would stay.
She was too angry, however, to make any answer but by a distant bow of the 
head, and left the house with a resolution little short of a vow never again to 
enter it.
Her reflections upon this unfortunate visit were bitter beyond measure; the 
situation in which she had been surprised,—clandestinely concealed with only 
Belfield and his sister—joined to the positive assertions of her partiality 
for him made by his mother, could not, to Mr Delvile, but appear marks 
irrefragable that his charge in his former conversation was rather mild than 
over-strained, and that the connection he had mentioned, for whatever motives 
denied, was incontestably formed.
The apparent conviction of this part of the accusation, might also authorise, 
to one but too happy in believing ill of her, an implicit faith in that which 
regarded her having run out her fortune. His determination not to hear her 
shewed the inflexibility of his character; and it was evident, notwithstanding 
his parading pretensions of wishing her welfare, that his inordinate pride was 
inflamed, at the very supposition he could be mistaken or deceived for a moment.
Even Delvile himself, if gone abroad, might now hear this account with 
exaggerations that would baffle all his confidence: his mother, too, greatly as 
she esteemed and loved her, might have the matter so represented as to stagger 
her good opinion;—these were thoughts the most afflicting she could harbour, 
though their probability was such that to banish them was impossible.
To apply again to Mr Delvile to hear her vindication, was to subject herself to 
insolence, and almost to court indignity. She disdained even to write to him, 
since his behaviour called for resentment, not concession; and such an 
eagerness to be heard, in opposition to all discouragement, would be practising 
a meanness that would almost merit repulsion.
Her first inclination was to write to Mrs Delvile, but what now, to her, was 
either her defence or accusation? She had solemnly renounced all further 
intercourse with her, she had declared against writing again, and prohibited 
her letters: and, therefore, after much fluctuation of opinion, her delicacy 
concurred with her judgment, to conclude it would be most proper, in a 
situation so intricate, to leave the matter to chance, and commit her character 
to time.
In the evening, while she was at tea with Lady Margaret and Miss Bennet, she 
was suddenly called out to speak to a young woman; and found, to her great 
surprise, she was no other than Henrietta.
"Ah madam!" she cried, "how angrily did you go away this morning! it has made 
me miserable ever since, and if you go out of town without forgiving me, I 
shall fret myself quite ill! my mother is gone out to tea, and I have run here 
all alone, and in the dark, and in the wet, to beg and pray you will forgive 
me, for else I don't know what I shall do!"
"Sweet, gentle girl!" cried Cecilia, affectionately embracing her, "if you had 
excited all the anger I am capable of feeling, such softness as this would 
banish it, and make me love you more than ever!"
Henrietta then said, in her excuse, that she had thought herself quite sure of 
her brother's absence, who almost always spent the whole day at the 
bookseller's, as in writing himself he perpetually wanted to consult other 
authors, and had very few books at their lodgings: but she would not mention 
that the room was his, lest Cecilia should object to making use of it, and she 
knew she had no other chance of having the conversation with her she had so 
very long wished for. She then again begged her pardon, and hoped the behaviour 
of her mother would not induce her to give her up, as she was shocked at it 
beyond measure, and as her brother, she assured her, was as innocent of it as 
herself.
Cecilia heard her with pleasure, and felt for her an encreasing regard. The 
openness of her confidence in the morning had merited all her affection, and 
she gave her the warmest protestations of a friendship which she was certain 
would be lasting as her life.
Henrietta then, with a countenance that spoke the lightness of her heart, 
hastily took her leave, saying she did not dare be out longer, lest her mother 
should discover her excursion. Cecilia insisted, however, upon her going in a 
chair, which she ordered her servant to attend, and take care himself to 
discharge.
This visit, joined to the tender and unreserved conversation of the morning, 
gave Cecilia the strongest desire to invite her to her house in the country; 
but the terror of Mrs Belfield's insinuations, added to the cruel 
interpretations she had to expect from Mr Delvile, forbid her indulging this 
wish, though it was the only one that just now she could form.





