
The spring was now advancing, and the weather was remarkably fine; when one 
morning, while Cecilia was walking with Mrs Harrel and Henrietta on the lawn 
before her house, to which the last dinner bell was just summoning them, to 
return, Mrs Harrel looked round and stopt at sight of a gentleman galloping 
towards them, who in less than a minute approached, and dismounting and leaving 
his horse to his servant, struck them all at the same instant to be no other 
than young Delvile!
A sight so unexpected, so unaccountable, so wonderful, after an absence so 
long, and to which they were mutually bound, almost wholly over-powered Cecilia 
from surprise and a thousand other feelings, and she caught Mrs Harrel by the 
arm, not knowing what she did, as if for succour; while Henrietta with scarce 
less, though much more glad emotion, suddenly exclaimed, "'tis Mr Delvile!" and 
sprang forward to meet him.
He had reached them, and in a voice that spoke hurry and perturbation, 
respectfully made his compliments to them all, before Cecilia recovered even 
the use of her feet: but no sooner were they restored to her, than she employed 
them with the quickest motion in her power, still leaning upon Mrs Harrel, to 
hasten into the house. Her solemn promise to Mrs Delvile became uppermost in 
her thoughts, and her surprise was soon succeeded by displeasure, that thus, 
without any preparation, he forced her to break it by an interview she had no 
means to prevent.
Just as they reached the entrance into the house, the Butler came to tell 
Cecilia that dinner was upon the table. Delvile then went up to her, and said, 
"May I wait upon you for one instant before—or after you dine?"
"I am engaged, Sir," answered she, though hardly able to speak, "for the whole 
day."
"You will not, I hope, refuse to hear me," cried he, eagerly, "I cannot write 
what I have to say,—"
"There is no occasion that you should, Sir," interrupted she, "since I should 
scarcely find time to read it."
She then courtsied, though without looking at him, and went into the house; 
Delvile remaining in utter dismay, not daring, however wishing, to follow her. 
But when Mrs Harrel, much surprised at behaviour so unusual from Cecilia, 
approached him with some civil speeches, he started, and wishing her good day, 
bowed, and remounted his horse: pursued by the soft eyes of Henrietta till 
wholly out of sight.
They then both followed Cecilia to the dining-parlour.
Had not Mrs Harrel been of this small party, the dinner would have been served 
in vain; Cecilia, still trembling with emotion, bewildered with conjecture, 
angry with Delvile for thus surprising her, angry with herself for so severely 
receiving him, amazed what had tempted him to such a violation of their joint 
agreement, and irresolute as much what to wish as what to think, was little 
disposed for eating, and with difficulty compelled herself to do the honours of 
her table.
Henrietta, whom the sight of Delvile had at once delighted and disturbed, whom 
the behaviour of Cecilia had filled with wonder and consternation, and whom the 
evident inquietude and disappointment which that behaviour had given to 
Delvile, had struck with grief and terror, could not swallow even a morsel, but 
having cut her meat about her plate, gave it, untouched, to a servant.
Mrs Harrel, however, though she had had her share in the surprise, had wholly 
escaped all other emotion; and only concluded in her own mind, that Cecilia 
could sometimes be out of humour and ill bred, as well as the rest of the world.
While the dessert was serving, a note was brought to Henrietta, which a servant 
was waiting in great haste to have answered.
Henrietta, stranger to all forms of politeness, though by nature soft, obliging 
and delicate, opened it immediately; she started as she cast her eye over it, 
but blushed, sparkled, and looked enchanted, and hastily rising, without even a 
thought of any apology, ran out of the room to answer it.
Cecilia, whose quick eye, by a glance unavoidable, had seen the hand of 
Delvile, was filled with new amazement at the sight. As soon as the servants 
were gone, she begged Mrs Harrel to excuse her, and went to her own apartment.
Here, in a few minutes, she was followed by Henrietta, whose countenance beamed 
with pleasure, and whose voice spoke tumultuous delight. "My dear, dear Miss 
Beverley!" she cried, "I have such a thing to tell you!—you would never guess 
it,—I don't know how to believe it myself,—but Mr Delvile has written to 
me!—he has indeed! that note was from him.—I have been locking it up, for 
fear of accidents, but I'll run and fetch it, that you may see it yourself."
She then ran away; leaving Cecilia much perplexed, much uneasy for herself, and 
both grieved and alarmed for the too tender, too susceptible Henrietta, who was 
thus easily the sport of every airy and credulous hope.
"If I did not shew it you," cried Henrietta, running back in a moment, "you 
would never think it possible, for it is to make such a request—that it has 
frightened me almost out of my wits!"
Cecilia then read the note.
To Miss Belfield.
Mr Delvile presents his compliments to Miss Belfield, and begs to be permitted 
to wait upon her for a few minutes, at any time in the afternoon she will be so 
good as to appoint.
"Only think," cried the rapturous Henrietta, "it was me, poor simple me, of all 
people, that he wanted so to speak with!—I am sure I thought a different 
thought when he went away! but do, dearest Miss Beverley, tell me this one 
thing, what do you think he can have to say to me?"
"Indeed," replied Cecilia, extremely embarrassed, "it is impossible for me to 
conjecture."
"If you can't, I am sure, then, it is no wonder I can't! and I have been 
thinking of a million of things in a minute. It can't be about any business, 
because I know nothing in the world of any business; and it can't be about my 
brother, because he would go to our house in town about him, and there he would 
see him himself; and it can't be about my dear Miss Beverley, because then he 
would have written the note to her and it can't be about any body else, because 
I know nobody else of his acquaintance."
Thus went on the sanguine Henrietta, settling whom and what it could not be 
about, till she left but the one thing to which her wishes pointed that it 
could be about. Cecilia heard her with true compassion, certain that she was 
deceiving herself with imaginations the most pernicious; yet unable to know how 
to quell them, while in such doubt and darkness herself.
This conversation was soon interrupted, by a message that a gentleman in the 
parlour begged to speak with Miss Belfield.
"O dearest, dearest Miss Beverley!" cried Henrietta, with encreasing agitation, 
"what in the world shall I say to him, advise me, pray advise me, for I can't 
think of a single word!"
"Impossible, my dear Henrietta, unless I knew what he would say to you!"
"O but I can guess, I can guess!"—cried she, her cheeks glowing, while her 
whole frame shook, "and I sha'n't know what in the whole world to answer him! I 
know I shall behave like a fool,—I know I shall disgrace myself sadly!"
Cecilia, truly sorry Delvile should see her in such emotion, endeavoured 
earnestly to compose her, though never less tranquil herself. But she could not 
succeed, and she went down stairs with expectations of happiness almost too 
potent for her reason.
Not such were those of Cecilia; a dread of some new conflict took possession of 
her mind, that mind so long tortured with struggles, so lately restored to 
serenity!
Henrietta soon returned, but not the same Henrietta she went;—the glow, the 
hope, the flutter were all over; she looked pale and wan, but attempting, as 
she entered the room, to call up a smile, she failed, and burst into tears.
Cecilia threw her arms round her neck, and tried to console her; but, happy to 
hide her face in her bosom, she only gave the freer indulgence to her grief, 
and rather melted than comforted by her tenderness, sobbed aloud.
Cecilia too easily conjectured the disappointment she had met, to pain her by 
asking it; she forbore even to gratify her own curiosity by questions that 
could not but lead to her mortification, and suffering her therefore to take 
her own time for what she had to communicate, she hung over her in silence with 
the most patient pity.
Henrietta was very sensible of this kindness, though she knew not half its 
merit: but it was a long time before she could articulate, for sobbing, that 
all Mr Delvile wanted, at last, was only to beg she would acquaint Miss 
Beverley, that he had done himself the honour of waiting upon her with a 
message from Mrs Delvile.
"From Mrs Delvile?" exclaimed Cecilia, all emotion in her turn, "good heaven! 
how much, then, have I been to blame? where is he now?—where can I send to 
him?—tell me, my sweet Henrietta, this instant!"
"Oh madam!" cried Henrietta, bursting into a fresh flood of tears, "how foolish 
have I been to open my silly heart to you!—he is come to pay his addresses to 
you!—I am sure he is!—"
"No, no, no!" cried Cecilia, "indeed he is not!—but I must, I ought to see 
him,—where, my love, is he?",
"In the parlour,—waiting for an answer.—"
Cecilia, who at any other time would have been provoked at such a delay in the 
delivery of a message so important, felt now nothing but concern for Henrietta, 
whom she hastily kissed, but instantly, however, quitted, and hurried to 
Delvile, with expectations almost equally sanguine as those her poor friend but 
the moment before had crushed.
"Oh now," thought she, "if at last Mrs Delvile herself has relented, with what 
joy will I give up all reserve, all disguise, and frankly avow the faithful 
affection of my heart!"
Delvile received her not with the eagerness with which he had first addressed 
her; he looked extremely disturbed, and, even after her entrance, undetermined 
how to begin.
She waited, however, his explanation in silence; and, after an irresolute 
pause, he said, with a gravity not wholly free from resentment, "I presumed, 
madam, to wait upon you from the permission of my mother; but I believe I have 
obtained it so late, that the influence I hoped from it is past!"
"I had no means, Sir," answered she, chearfully, "to know that you came from 
her: I should else have received her commands without any hesitation."
"I would thank you for the honour you do her, were it less pointedly exclusive. 
I have, however, no right of reproach! yet suffer me to ask, could you, madam, 
after such a parting, after a renunciation so absolute of all future claim upon 
you, which though extorted from me by duty, I was bound, having promised, to 
fulfil by principle,-could you imagine me so unsteady, so dishonourable, as to 
obtrude myself into your presence while that promise was still in force?"
"I find," cried Cecilia, in whom a secret hope every moment grew stronger, "I 
have been too hasty; I did indeed believe Mrs Delvile would never authorise 
such a visit; but as you have so much surprised me, I have a right to your 
pardon for a little doubt."
"There spoke Miss Beverley!" cried Delvile, reanimating at this little apology, 
"the same, the unaltered Miss Beverley I hoped to find!—yet is she unaltered? 
am I not too precipitate? and is the tale I have heard about Belfield a dream? 
an error? a falsehood?"
"But that so quick a succession of quarrels," said Cecilia, half smiling, 
"would be endless perplexity, I, now, would be affronted that you can ask me 
such a question."
"Had I, indeed, thought it a question," cried he, "I would not have asked it: 
but never for a moment did I credit it, till the rigour of your repulse alarmed 
me. You have condescended, now, to account for that, and I am therefore 
encouraged to make known to you the purpose of my venturing this visit. Yet not 
with confidence shall I speak if, scarce even with hope!—it is a purpose that 
is the offspring of despair,—
"One thing, Sir," cried Cecilia, who now became frightened again, "let me say 
before you proceed; if your purpose has not the sanction of Mrs Delvile, as 
well as your visit, I would gladly be excused hearing it, since I shall most 
certainly refuse it."
"I would mention nothing," answered he, "without her concurrence; she has given 
it me: and my father himself has permitted my present application."
"Good Heaven!" cried Cecilia, "is it possible!" clasping her hands together in 
the eagerness of her surprise and delight.
"Is it possible!" repeated Delvile, with a look of rapture; "ah Miss 
Beverley!—once my own Cecilia!—do you, can you wish it possible?"
"No, No!" cried she, while pleasure and expectation sparkled in her eyes, "I 
wish nothing about it.—Yet tell me how it has happened,—I am curious," 
added she, smiling, "though not interested in it."
"What hope would this sweetness give me," cried he, "were my scheme almost any 
other than it is!—but you cannot,—no, it would be unreasonable, it would be 
madness to expect your compliance!—it is next to madness even in me to wish 
it,—but how shall a man who is desperate be prudent and circumspect?"
"Spare, spare yourself," cried the ingenuous Cecilia, "this, unnecessary 
pain!—you will find from me no unnecessary scruples."
"You know not what you say!—all noble as you are, the sacrifice I have to 
propose—"
"Speak it," cried she, "with confidence! speak it even with certainty of 
success! I will be wholly undisguised, and openly, honestly own to you, that no 
proposal, no sacrifice can be mentioned, to which I will not instantly agree, 
if first it has had the approbation of Mrs Delvile."
Delvile's gratitude and thanks for a concession never before so voluntarily 
made to him, interrupted for a while, even his power of explaining himself. And 
now, for the first time, Cecilia's sincerity was chearful, since now, for the 
first time, it seemed opposed by no duty.
When still, therefore, he hesitated, she herself held out her hand to him, 
saying, "what must I do more? must I offer this pledge to you?"
"For my life would I not resign it!" cried he, delightedly receiving it; "but 
oh, how soon will you withdraw it, when the only terms upon which I can hold 
it, are those of making it sign from itself its natural right and inheritance?"
Cecilia, not comprehending him, only looked amazed, and he proceeded.
"Can you, for my sake, make such a sacrifice as this? can you for a man who for 
yours is not permitted to give up his name, give up yourself the fortune of 
your late uncle? consent to such settlements as I can make upon you from my 
own? part with so splendid an income wholly and for-ever?—and with only your 
paternal L10,000 condescend to become mine, as if your uncle had never existed, 
and you had been Heiress to no other wealth?"
This, indeed, was a stroke to Cecilia unequalled by any she had met, and more 
cruel than any she could have in reserve. At the proposal of parting with her 
uncle's fortune, which, desirable as it was, had as yet been only productive to 
her of misery, her heart, disinterested, and wholly careless of money, was 
prompt to accede to the condition; but at the mention of her paternal fortune, 
that fortune, of which, now, not the smallest vestige remained, horror seized 
all her faculties! she turned pale, she trembled, she involuntarily drew back 
her hand, and betrayed, by speechless agitation, the sudden agonies of her soul!
Delvile, struck by this evident dismay, instantly concluded his plan had 
disgusted her. He waited some minutes in anxious expectation of an answer, but 
finding her silence continued while her emotion encreased, the deepest crimson 
dyed his face, and unable to check his chagrin, though not daring to confess 
his disappointment, he suddenly quitted her, and walked, in much disorder, 
about the room. But soon recovering some composure, from the assistance of 
pride, "Pardon, madam," he said, "a trial such as no man can be vindicated in 
making. I have indulged a romantic whim, which your better judgment 
disapproves, and I receive but the mortification my presumption deserved."
"You know not then," said Cecilia, in a faint voice, "my inability to comply?"
"Your ability or inability, I presume, are elective?"
"Oh no!—my power is lost—my fortune itself is gone!"
"Impossible! utterly impossible!" cried he with vehemence.
"Oh that it were!—your father knows it but too well."
"My father!"
"Did he, then, never hint it to you?"
"Oh distraction!" cried Delvile, "what horrible confirmation is coming!" and 
again he walked away, as if wanting courage to hear her.
Cecilia was too much shocked to force upon him her explanation; but presently 
returning to her, he said, "you, only, could have made this credible!"
"Had you, then, actually heard it?"
"Oh I had heard it as the most infamous of falsehoods! my heart swelled with 
indignation at so villainous a calumny, and had it not come from my father, my 
resentment at it had been inveterate!"
"Alas!" cried Cecilia, "the fact is undeniable! yet the circumstances you may 
have heard with it, are I doubt not exaggerated."
"Exaggerated indeed!" he answered; "I was told you had been surprised concealed 
with Belfield in a back room, I was told that your parental fortune was totally 
exhausted, and that during your minority you had been a dealer with Jews!—I 
was told all this by my father; you may believe I had else not easily been made 
hear it!"
"Yet thus far," said she, "he told you but what is true; though—"
"True!" interrupted Delvile, with a start almost frantic. "Oh never, then, was 
truth so scandalously wronged!—I denied the whole charge!-I disbelieved every 
syllable!—I pledged my own honour to prove every assertion false!"
"Generous Delvile!" cried Cecilia, melting into tears, "this is what I expected 
from you! and, believe me, in your integrity my reliance had been similar!"
"Why does Miss Beverley weep?" cried he, softened, and approaching her, "and 
why has she given me this alarm? these things must at least have been 
misrepresented, deign, then, to clear up a mystery in which suspense is 
torture!"
Cecilia, then, with what precision and clearness her agitation allowed her, 
related the whole history of her taking up the money of the Jew for Mr Harrel, 
and told, without reserve, the reason of her trying to abscond from his father 
at Mrs Belfield's. Delvile listened to her account with almost an agony of 
attention, now admiring her conduct; now resenting her ill usage; now 
compassionating her losses; but though variously moved by different parts, 
receiving from the whole the delight he most coveted in the establishment of 
her innocence.
Thanks and applause the warmest, both accompanied and followed her narration; 
and then, at her request, he related in return the several incidents and 
circumstances to which he had owed the permission of this visit.
He had meant immediately to have gone abroad; but the indisposition of his 
mother made him unwilling to leave the kingdom till her health seemed in a 
situation less precarious. That time, however, came not; the Winter advanced, 
and she grew evidently worse. He gave over, therefore, his design till the next 
Spring, when, if she were able, it was her desire to try the South of France 
for her recovery, whither he meant to conduct her.
But, during his attendance upon her, the plan he had just mentioned occurred to 
him, and he considered how much greater would be his chance of happiness in 
marrying Cecilia with scarce any fortune at all, than in marrying another with 
the largest. He was convinced she was far other than expensive, or a lover of 
shew, and soon flattered himself she might be prevailed upon to concur with 
him, that in living together, though comparatively upon little, they should 
mutually be happier than in living asunder upon much.
When he started this scheme to his mother, she heard it with mingled admiration 
of his disinterestedness, and regret at its occasion: yet the loftiness of her 
own mind, her high personal value for Cecilia, her anxiety to see her son 
finally settled while she lived, lest his disappointment should keep him single 
from a lasting disgust, joined to a dejection of spirits from an apprehension 
that her interference had been cruel, all favoured his scheme, and forbid her 
resistance. She had often protested, in their former conflicts, that had 
Cecilia been portionless, her objections had been less than to an estate so 
conditioned; and that to give to her son a woman so exalted in herself, she 
would have conquered the mere opposition of interest, though that of family 
honour she held invincible. Delvile now called upon her to remember those 
words, and ever strict in fidelity, she still promised to abide by them.
Ah! thought Cecilia, is virtue, then, as inconsistent as vice? and can the same 
character be thus high-souled, thus nobly disinterested with regard to riches, 
whose pride is so narrow and so insurmountable, with respect to family 
prejudice!
Yet such a sacrifice from Cecilia herself, whose income intitled her to 
settlements the most splendid, Mrs Delvile thought scarcely to be solicited; 
but as her son was conscious he gave up in expectation no less than she would 
give up in possession, he resolved upon making the experiment, and felt an 
internal assurance of success.
This matter being finally settled with his mother, the harder task remained of 
vanquishing the father, by whom, and before whom the name of Cecilia was never 
mentioned, not even after his return from town, though loaded with imaginary 
charges against her. Mr Delvile held it a diminution of his own in the honour 
of his son, to suppose he wanted still fresh motives for resigning her. He 
kept, therefore, to himself the ill opinion he brought down, as a resource in 
case of danger, but a resource he disdained to make use of, unless driven to it 
by absolute necessity.
But, at the new proposal of his son, the accusation held in reserve broke out; 
he called Cecilia a dabler with Jews, and said she had been so from the time of 
her uncle's death; he charged her with the grossest general extravagance, to 
which he added a most insidious attack upon her character, drawn from her 
visits at Belfield's of long standing, as well as the particular time when he 
had himself surprised her concealed with the young man in a back parlour: and 
he asserted, that most of the large sums she was continually taking up from her 
fortune, were lavished without scruple upon this dangerous and improper 
favourite.
Delvile had heard this accusation with a rage scarce restrained from violence; 
confident in her innocence, he boldly pronounced the whole a forgery, and 
demanded the author of such cruel defamation. Mr Delvile, much offended, 
refused to name any authority, but consented, with an air of triumph, to abide 
by the effect of his own proposal, and gave him a supercilious promise no 
longer to oppose the marriage, if the terms he meant to offer to Miss Beverley, 
of renouncing her uncle's estate, and producing her father's fortune, were 
accepted.
"O little did I credit," said Delvile in conclusion, "that he knew indeed so 
well this last condition was impracticable! his assertions were without proof; 
I thought them prejudiced surmises; and I came in the full hope I should 
convict him of his error. My mother, too, who warmly and even angrily defended 
you, was as firmly satisfied as myself that the whole was a mistake, and that 
enquiry would prove your fortune as undiminished as your purity. How will she 
be shocked at the tale I have now to unfold! how irritated at your injuries 
from Harrel! how grieved that your own too great benevolence should be 
productive of such black aspersions upon your character!"
"I have been," cried Cecilia, "too facile and too unguarded; yet always, at the 
moment, I seemed but guided by common humanity. I have ever thought myself 
secure of more wealth than I could require, and regarded the want of money as 
an evil from which I was unavoidably exempted. My own fortune, therefore, 
appeared to me of small consequence, while the revenue of my uncle insured me 
perpetual prosperity.—Oh had I foreseen this moment—"
"Would you, then, have listened to my romantic proposal?"
"Would I have listened?—do you not see too plainly I could not have 
hesitated!"
"Oh yet, then, most generous of human beings, yet then be mine! By our own 
oeconomy we will pay off our mortgages; by living a while abroad, we will clear 
all our estates; I will still keep the name to which my family is bigotted, and 
my gratitude for your compliance shall make you forget what you lose by it!"
"Speak not to me such words!" cried Cecilia, hastily rising; "your friends will 
not listen to them, neither, therefore, must I."
"My friends," cried he with energy, "are henceforth out of the question: my 
father's concurrence with a proposal he knew you had not power to grant, was in 
fact a mere permission to insult you; for if, instead of dark charges, he had 
given any authority for your losses, I had myself spared you the shock you have 
so undeservedly received from hearing it.—But to consent to a plan which 
could not be accepted!—to make me a tool to offer indignity to Miss 
Beverley!—He has released me from his power by so erroneous an exertion of 
it, and my own honour has a claim to which his commands must give place. That 
honour binds me to Miss Beverley as forcibly as my admiration, and no voice but 
her own shall determine my future destiny."
"That voice, then," said Cecilia, "again refers you to your mother. Mr Delvile, 
indeed, has not treated me kindly; and this last mock concession was 
unnecessary cruelty; but Mrs Delvile merits my utmost respect, and I will 
listen to nothing which has not her previous sanction."
"But will her sanction be sufficient? and may I hope, in obtaining it, the 
security of yours?"
"When I have said I will hear nothing without it, may you not almost infer—I 
will refuse nothing with it!"
The acknowledgments he would now have poured forth, Cecilia would not hear, 
telling him, with some gaiety, they were yet unauthorized by Mrs Delvile. She 
insisted upon his leaving her immediately, and never again returning, without 
his mother's express approbation. With regard to his father, she left him 
totally to his own inclination; she had received from him nothing but pride and 
incivility, and determined to skew publicly her superior respect for Mrs 
Delvile, by whose discretion and decision she was content to abide.
"Will you not, then, from time to time," cried Delvile, "suffer me to consult 
with you?"
"No, no," answered she, "do not ask it! I have never been insincere with you, 
never but from motives not to be overcome, reserved even for a moment; I have 
told you I will put every thing into the power of Mrs Delvile, but I will not a 
second time risk my peace by any action unknown to her."
Delvile gratefully acknowledged her goodness, and promised to require nothing 
more. He then obeyed her by taking leave, eager himself to put an end to this 
new uncertainty, and supplicating only that her good wishes might follow his 
enterprise.
And thus, again, was wholly broken the tranquility of Cecilia; new hopes, 
however faint, awakened all her affections, and strong fears, but too 
reasonable, interrupted her repose. Her destiny, once more, was as undecided as 
ever, and the expectations she had crushed, retook possession of her heart.
The suspicions she had conceived of Mr Monckton again occurred to her; though 
unable to ascertain and unwilling to believe them, she tried to drive them from 
her thoughts. She lamented, however, with bitterness, her unfortunate connexion 
with Mr Harrel, whose unworthy impositions upon her kindness of temper and 
generosity, now proved to her an evil far more serious and extensive, than in 
the midst of her repugnance to them she had ever apprehended.





