
Two whole days passed thus; no enquiries reached Mrs Wyers, and she found in 
the news-papers no advertisement. Meanwhile Cecilia grew worse every moment, 
tasted neither drink nor food, raved incessantly, called out twenty times in a 
breath, "Where is he? which way is he gone?" and implored the woman by the most 
pathetic remonstrances, to save her unhappy Delvile, dearer to her than life, 
more precious than peace or rest!
At other times she talked of her marriage, of the displeasure of his family, 
and of her own remorse; entreated the woman not to betray her, and promised to 
spend the remnant of her days in the heaviness of sorrow and contrition.
Again her fancy roved, and Mr Monckton took sole possession of it. She 
reproached him for his perfidy, she bewailed that he was massacred, she would 
not a moment out-live him, and wildly declared her last remains should moulder 
in his hearse! And thus, though naturally and commonly of a silent and quiet 
disposition, she was now not a moment still, for the irregular starts of a 
terrified and disordered imagination, were changed into the constant ravings of 
morbid delirium.
The woman, growing uneasy from her uncertainty of pay for her trouble, asked 
the advice of some of her friends what was proper for her to do; and they 
counselled her to put an advertisement into the papers herself the next morning.
The following, therefore, was drawn up and sent to the printer of the Daily 
Advertiser.
MADNESS.
Whereas a crazy young lady, tall, fair complexioned, with blue eyes and light 
hair, ran into the Three Blue Balls, in——street, on Thursday night, the 2nd 
instant, and has been kept there since out of charity. She was dressed in a 
riding habit. Whoever she belongs to is desired to send after her immediately. 
She has been treated with the utmost care and tenderness. She talks much of 
some person by the name of Delvile.
N.B.—She had no money about her.
May, 1780.
This had but just been sent off, when Mr Wyers, the man of the house, coming up 
stairs, said, "Now we shall have two of them, for here's the crazy old 
gentleman below, that says he has just heard in the neighbourhood of what has 
happened to us, and he desires to see the poor lady."
"It's as well let him come up, then," answered Mrs Wyers, "for he goes to all 
sort of places and people, and ten to one but he'll bustle about till he finds 
out who she is."
Mr Wyers then went down stairs to send him up.
He came instantly. It was Albany, who in his vagrant rambles, having heard an 
unknown mad lady was at this pawn-broker's, came, with his customary eagerness 
to visit and serve the unhappy, to see what could be done for her.
When he entered the room, she was sitting upon the bed, her eyes earnestly 
fixed upon the window, from which she was privately indulging a wish to make 
her escape. Her dress was in much disorder, her fine hair was dishevelled, and 
the feathers of her riding hat were broken and half falling down, some shading 
her face, others reaching to her shoulder.
"Poor lady!" cried Albany, approaching her, "how long has she been in this 
state?"
She started at the sound of a new voice, she looked round,—but what was the 
astonishment of Albany to see who it was!—He stept back,-he came 
forward,—he doubted his own senses,—he looked at her earnestly,—he turned 
from her to look at the woman of the house,—he cast his eyes round the room 
itself, and then, lifting up his hands, "O sight of woe!" he cried, "the 
generous and good! the kind reliever of distress! the benign sustainer of 
misery!—is This Cecilia!"—
Cecilia, imperfectly recollecting, though not understanding him, sunk down at 
his feet, tremblingly called out, "Oh, if he is yet to be saved, if already he 
is not murdered,—go to him! fly after him! you will presently overtake him, 
he is only in the next street, I left him there myself, his sword drawn, and 
covered with human blood!"
"Sweet powers of kindness and compassion!" cried the old man, "look upon this 
creature with pity! she who raised the depressed, she who cheared the unhappy! 
she whose liberal hand turned lamentations into joy! who never with a tearless 
eye could hear the voice of sorrow!—is This she herself!—can This be 
Cecilia!"
"O do not wait to talk!" cried she, "go to him now, or you will never see him 
more! the hand of death is on him,—cold, clay-cold is its touch! he is 
breathing his last—Oh murdered Delvile! massacred husband of my heart! groan 
not so piteously! fly to him, and weep over him!—fly to him and pluck the 
poniard from his wounded bosom!"
"Oh sounds of anguish and horror!" cried the melted moralist, tears running 
quick down his rugged cheeks; "melancholy indeed is this sight, humiliating to 
morality! such is human strength, such human felicity!—weak as our virtues, 
frail as our guilty natures!"
"Ah," cried she, more wildly, "no one will save me now! I am married, and no 
one will listen to me! ill were the auspices under which I gave my hand! Oh it 
was a work of darkness, unacceptable and offensive! it has been sealed, 
therefore, with blood, and to-morrow it will be signed with murder!"
"Poor distracted creature!" exclaimed he, "thy pangs I have felt, but thy 
innocence I have forfeited!—my own wounds bleed afresh,—my own brain 
threatens new frenzy."—
Then, starting up, "Good woman," he added, "kindly attend her,—I will seek 
out her friends, put her into bed, comfort, sooth, compose her.—I will come 
to you again, and as soon as I can."
He then hurried away.
"Oh hour of joy!" cried Cecilia, "he is gone to rescue him! oh blissful moment! 
he will yet be snatched from slaughter!"
The woman lost not an instant in obeying the orders she had received; she was 
put into bed, and nothing was neglected, as far as she had power and thought, 
to give a look of decency and attention to her accommodations.
He had not left them an hour, when Mary, the maid who had attended her from 
Suffolk, came to enquire for her lady. Albany, who was now wandering over the 
town in search of some of her friends, and who entered every house where he 
imagined she was known, had hastened to that of Mrs Hill the first of any, as 
he was well acquainted with her obligations to Cecilia; there, Mary herself, by 
the directions which her lady had given Mrs Belfield, had gone; and there, in 
the utmost astonishment and uneasiness, had continued till Albany brought news 
of her.
She was surprised and afflicted beyond measure, not only at the state of her 
mind, and her health, but to find her in a bed and an apartment so unsuitable 
to her rank of life, and so different to what she had ever been accustomed. She 
wept bitterly while she enquired at the bed-side how her lady did, but wept 
still more, when, without answering, or seeming to know her, Cecilia started 
up, and called out, "I must be removed this moment! I must go to St 
James's-square,—if I stay an instant longer, the passing-bell will toll, and 
then how shall I be in time for the funeral?"
Mary, alarmed and amazed, turned hastily from her to the woman of the house, 
who calmly said, the lady was only in a raving fit, and must not be minded.
Extremely frightened at this intelligence, she entreated her to be quiet and 
lie still. But Cecilia grew suddenly so violent, that force only could keep her 
from rising; and Mary, unused to dispute her commands, prepared to obey them.
Mrs Wyers now in her turn opposed in vain; Cecilia was peremptory, and Mary 
became implicit, and, though not without much difficulty, she was again dressed 
in her riding habit. This operation over, she moved towards the door, the 
temporary strength of delirium giving, her a hardiness that combated fever, 
illness, fatigue, and feebleness. Mary, however averse and fearful, assisted 
her, and Mrs Wyers, compelled by the obedience of her own servant, went before 
them to order a chair.
Cecilia, however, felt her weakness when she attempted to move down stairs; her 
feet tottered, and her head became dizzy; she leaned it against Mary, who 
called aloud for more help, and made her sit down till it came. Her resolution, 
however, was not to be altered; a stubbornness, wholly foreign to her genuine 
character, now made her stern and positive; and Mary, who thought her 
submission indispensable, cried, but did not offer to oppose her.
Mr and Mrs Wyers both came up to assist in supporting her, and Mr Wyers offered 
to carry her in his arms; but she would not consent; when she came to the 
bottom of the stairs, her head grew worse, she again lent it upon Mary, but Mr 
Wyers was obliged to hold them both. She still, however, was firm in her 
determination, and was making another effort to proceed, when Delvile rushed 
hastily into the shop.
He had just encountered Albany; who, knowing his acquaintance, though ignorant 
of his marriage, with Cecilia, had informed him where to seek her.
He was going to make enquiry if he was come to the right house, when he 
perceived her,—feeble, shaking, leaning upon one person, and half carried by 
another!—he started back, staggered, gasped for breath,—but finding they 
were proceeding, advanced with trepidation, furiously calling out, "Hold! 
stop!—what is it you are doing? Monsters of savage barbarity, are you 
murdering my wife?"
The well-known voice no sooner struck the ears of Cecilia, than instantly 
recollecting it, she screamed, and, is suddenly endeavouring to spring forward, 
fell to the ground.
Delvile had vehemently advanced to catch her in his arms and save her fall, 
which her unexpected quickness had prevented her attendants from doing; but the 
sight of her changed complection, and the wildness of her eyes and air, again 
made him start,—his blood froze through his veins, and he stood looking at 
her, cold and almost petrified.
Her own recollection of him seemed lost already; and exhausted by the fatigue 
she had gone through in dressing and coming down stairs, she remained still and 
quiet, forgetting her design of proceeding, and forming no new one for 
returning.
Mary, to whom, as to all her fellow servants, the marriage of Cecilia had been 
known, before she left the country, now desired from Delvile directions what 
was to be done.
Delvile, starting suddenly at this call from the deepest horror into the most 
desperate rage, fiercely exclaimed, "Inhuman wretches! unfeeling, execrable 
wretches, what is it you have done to her? how came she hither?—who brought 
her?—who dragged her?—by what infamous usage has she been sunk into this 
state?"
"Indeed, sir, I don't know!" cried Mary.
"I assure you, sir," said Mrs Wyers, "the lady—"
"Peace!" cried he, furiously, "I will not hear your falsehoods!—peace, and 
begone!"—
Then, casting himself upon the ground by her side, "Oh my Cecilia," he cried, 
"where hast thou been thus long? how have I lost thee? what dreadful calamity 
has befallen thee?—answer me, my love! raise your sweet head and answer 
me!—oh speak!—say to me any thing; the bitterest words will be mercy to 
this silence!"—-
Cecilia then, suddenly looking up, called out with great quickness, "Who are 
you?"
"Who am I!" cried he, amazed and affrighted.
"I should be glad you would go away," cried she, in a hurrying manner, "for you 
are quite unknown to me."
Delvile, unconscious of her insanity, and attributing to resentment this 
aversion and repulse, hastily moved from her, mournfully answering, "Well 
indeed may you disclaim me, refuse all forgiveness, load me with hatred and 
reproach, and consign me to eternal anguish! I have merited severer punishment 
still; I have behaved like a monster, and I am abhorrent to myself!"
Cecilia now, half rising, and regarding him with mingled terror and anger, 
eagerly exclaimed, "If you do not mean to mangle and destroy me, begone this 
instant."
"To mangle you!" repeated Delvile, shuddering, "how horrible!—but I deserve 
it!—look not, however, so terrified, and I will tear myself away from you. 
Suffer me but to assist in removing you from this place, and I will only watch 
you at a distance, and never see you more till you permit me to approach you."
"Why, why," cried Cecilia, with a look of perplexity and impatience, "will you 
not tell me your name, and where you come from?"
"Do you not know me?" said he, struck with new horror; "or do you only mean to 
kill me by the question?"
"Do you bring me any message from Mr Monckton?"
"From Mr Monckton?—no; but he lives and will recover."
"I thought you had been Mr Monckton yourself."
"Too cruel, yet justly cruel Cecilia!—is then Delvile utterly 
renounced?—the guilty, the unhappy Delvile!—is he cast off for ever? have 
you driven him wholly from your heart? do you deny him even a place in your 
remembrance?"
"Is your name, then, Delvile?"
"O what is it you mean? Is it me or my name you thus disown?"
"'Tis a name," cried she, sitting up, "I well remember to have heard, and once 
I loved it, and three times I called upon it in the dead of night. And when I 
was cold and wretched, I cherished it; and when I was abandoned and left alone, 
I repeated it and sung to it."
"All-gracious powers!" cried Delvile, "her reason is utterly gone!" And, 
hastily rising, he desperately added, "what is death to this blow?—Cecilia, I 
am content to part with thee!"
Mary now, and Mrs Wyers, poured upon him eagerly an account of her illness, and 
insanity, her desire of removal, and their inability to control her.
Delvile, however, made no answer; he scarce heard them: the deepest despair 
took possession of his mind, and, rooted to the spot where he stood, he 
contemplated iii dreadful stillness the fallen and altered object of his best 
hopes and affections; already in her faded cheeks and weakened frame, his 
agonising terror read the quick impending destruction of all his earthly 
happiness! the sight was too much for his fortitude, and almost for his 
understanding; and when his woe became utterable, he wrung his hands, and 
groaning aloud, called out, "Art thou gone so soon! my wife! my Cecilia! have I 
lost thee already?"
Cecilia, with utter insensibility to what was passing, now suddenly, and with a 
rapid yet continued motion, turned her head from side to side, her eyes wildly 
glaring, and yet apparently regarding nothing.
"Dreadful! dreadful!" exclaimed Delvile, "what a sight is this!" and turning 
from her to the people of the house, he angrily said, "why is she here upon the 
floor? could you not even allow her a bed? Who attends her? Who waits upon her? 
Why has nobody sent for help?—Don't answer me,—I will not hear you, fly 
this moment for a physician,—bring two, bring three—bring all you can find?"
Then, still looking from Cecilia, whose sight he could no longer support, he 
consulted with Mary whither she should be conveyed: and, as the night was far 
advanced, and no place was prepared for her elsewhere, they soon agreed that 
she could only be removed up stairs.
Delvile now attempted to carry her in his arms; but trembling and unsteady, he 
had not strength to sustain her; yet not enduring to behold the helplessness he 
could not assist, he conjured them to be careful and gentle, and, committing 
her to their trust, ran out himself for a physician.
Cecilia resisted them with her utmost power, imploring them not to bury her 
alive, and averring she had received intelligence they meant to entomb her with 
Mr Monckton.
They put her, however, to bed, but her raving grew still more wild and 
incessant.
Delvile soon returned with a physician, but had not courage to attend him to 
her room. He waited for him at the foot of the stairs, where, hastily stopping 
him,
"Well, sir," he cried, "is it not all over? is it not impossible she can live?"
"She is very ill, indeed, sir," he answered, "but I have given directions which 
perhaps—-"
"Perhaps!" interrupted Delvile, shuddering, "do not stab me with such a word!"
"She is very delirious," he continued, "but as her fever is very high, that is 
not so material. If the orders I have given take effect, and the fever is got 
under, all the rest will be well of course."
He then went away; leaving Delvile as much thunderstruck by answers so 
alarming, as if he had consulted him in full hope, and without even suspicion 
of her danger.
The moment he recovered from this shock, he flew out of the house for more 
advice.
He returned and brought with him two physicians. They confirmed the directions 
already given, but would pronounce nothing decisively of her situation.
Delvile, half mad with the acuteness of his misery, charged them all with want 
of skill, and wrote instantly into the country for Dr Lyster.
He went out himself in search of a messenger to ride off express, though it was 
midnight, with his letter; and then, returning, he was hastening to her room, 
but, while yet at the door, hearing her still raving, his horror conquered his 
eagerness, and, hurrying down stairs, he spent the remnant of the long and 
seemingly endless night in the shop.





