


The cab which had passed Adela and her brother at a short distance from
Wanley brought faces to the windows or door of almost every house as it
rolled through the village street. The direction in which it was going,
the trunk on the roof, the certainty that it had come from Agworth
station, suggested to everyone that young Eldon sat within. The occupant
had, however, put up both windows just before entering the village, and
sight of him was not obtained. Wanley had abundant matter for gossip
that evening. Hubert’s return, giving a keener edge to the mystery of
his so long delay, would alone have sufficed to wagging tongues; hut,
in addition, Mrs. Mewling was on the warpath, and the intelligence she
spread was of a kind to run like wildfire.

The approach to the Manor was a carriage-road, obliquely ascending the
bill from a point some quarter of a mile beyond the cottages which once
housed Belwick’s abbots. Of the house scarcely a glimpse could be caught
till you were well within the gates, so thickly was it embosomed in
trees. This afternoon it wore a cheerless face; most of the blinds were
still down, and the dwelling might have been unoccupied, for any sign of
human activity that the eye could catch. There was no porch at the main
entrance, and the heavy nail-studded door greeted a visitor somewhat
sombrely. On the front of a gable stood the words ‘Nisi Dominus.’

The vehicle drew up, and there descended a young man of pale
countenance, his attire indicating long and hasty travel. He pulled
vigorously at the end of a hanging bell-chain, and the door was
immediately opened by a man-servant in black. Hubert, for he it was,
pointed to his trunk, and, whilst it was being carried into the house,
took some loose coin from his pocket. He handed the driver a sovereign.

‘I have no change, sir,’ said the man, after examining the coin. But
Hubert had already turned away; he merely waved his hand, and entered
the house. For a drive of two miles, the cabman held himself tolerably
paid.

The hall was dusky, and seemed in need of fresh air. Hubert threw off
his hat, gloves, and overcoat; then for the first time spoke to the
servant, who stood in an attitude of expectancy.

‘Mrs. Eldon is at home?’

‘At home, sir, but very unwell. She desires me to say that she fears she
may not be able to see you this evening.’

‘Is there a fire anywhere?’

‘Only in the library, sir.’

‘I will dine there. And let a fire be lit in my bedroom.’

‘Yes, sir. Will you dine at once, sir?’

‘In an hour. Something light; I don’t care what it is.’

‘Shall the fire be lit in your bedroom at once, sir?’

‘At once, and a hot bath prepared. Come to the library and tell me when
it is ready.’

The servant silently departed. Hubert walked across the hall, giving a
glance here and there, and entered the library. Nothing had been
altered here since his father’s, nay, since his grandfather’s time.
That grandfather--his name Hubert--had combined strong intellectual
tendencies with the extravagant tastes which gave his already tottering
house the decisive push. The large collection of superbly-bound books
which this room contained were nearly all of his purchasing, for prior
to his time the Eldons had not been wont to concern themselves with
things of the mind. Hubert, after walking to the window and looking
out for a moment on the side lawn, pushed a small couch near to the
fireplace, and threw himself down at full length, his hands beneath his
head. In a moment his position seemed to have become uneasy; he turned
upon his side, uttering an exclamation as if of pain. A minute or two
and again he moved, this time with more evident impatience. The next
thing he did was to rise, step to the bell, and ring it violently.

The same servant appeared.

‘Isn’t the bath ready?’ Hubert asked. His former mode of speaking had
been brief and decided; he was now almost imperious.

‘I believe it will be in a moment, sir,’ was the reply, marked, perhaps,
by just a little failure in the complete subservience expected.

Hubert looked at the man for an instant with contracted brows, but
merely said--‘Tell them to be quick.’

The man returned in less than three minutes with a satisfactory
announcement, and Eldon went upstairs to refresh himself.

Two hours later he had dined, with obvious lack of appetite, and was
deriving but slight satisfaction from a cigar, when the servant entered
with a message from Mrs. Eldon: she desired to see her son.

Hubert threw his cigar aside, and made a gesture expressing his wish to
be led to his mother’s room. The man conducted him to the landing at the
head of the first flight of stairs; there a female servant was waiting,
who, after a respectful movement, led the way to a door at a few yards’
distance. She opened it and drew back. Hubert passed into the room.

It was furnished in a very old-fashioned style--heavily, richly, and
with ornaments seemingly procured rather as evidences of wealth than of
taste; successive Mrs. Eldons had used it as a boudoir. The present lady
of that name sat in a great chair near the fire. Though not yet fifty,
she looked at least ten years older; her hair had streaks of white, and
her thin delicate features were much lined and wasted. It would not be
enough to say that she had evidently once been beautiful, for in truth
she was so still, with a spiritual beauty of a very rare type. Just now
her face was set in a sternness which did not seem an expression natural
to it; the fine lips were much more akin to smiling sweetness, and the
brows accepted with repugnance anything but the stamp of thoughtful
charity.

After the first glance at Hubert she dropped her eyes. He, stepping
quickly across the floor, put his lips to her cheek; she did not move
her head, nor raise her hand to take his.

‘Will you sit there, Hubert?’ she said, pointing to a chair which
was placed opposite hers. The resemblance between her present mode of
indicating a wish and her son’s way of speaking to the servant below was
very striking; even the quality of their voices had much in common, for
Hubert’s was rather high-pitched. In face, however, the young man did
not strongly evidence their relation to each other: he was not handsome,
and had straight low brows, which made his aspect at first forbidding.

‘Why have you not come to me before this?’ Mrs. Eldon asked when her son
had seated himself, with his eyes turned upon the fire.

‘I was unable to, mother. I have been ill.’

She cast a glance at him. There was no doubting the truth of what he
said; at this moment he looked feeble and pain-worn.

‘Where did your illness come upon you?’ she asked, her tone unsoftened.

‘In Germany. I started only a few hours after receiving the letter in
which you told me of the death.’

‘My other letters you paid no heed to?’

‘I could not reply to them.’

He spoke after hesitation, but firmly, as one does who has something to
brave out.

‘It would have been better for you if you had been able, Hubert. Your
refusal has best you dear.’

He looked up inquiringly.

‘Mr. Mutimer,’ his mother continued, a tremor in her voice, ‘destroyed
his will a day or two before he died.’

Hubert said nothing. His fingers, looked together before him, twitched a
little; his face gave no sign.

‘Had you come to me at once,’ Mrs. Eldon pursued, ‘had you listened
to my entreaties, to my commands’--her voice rang right queenly--‘this
would not have happened. Mr. Mutimer behaved as generously as he always
has. As soon as there came to him certain news of you, he told me
everything. I refused to believe what people were saying, and he too
wished to do so. He would not write to you himself; there was one all
sufficient test, he held, and that was a summons from your mother. It
was a test of your honour, Hubert--and you failed under it.’

He made no answer.

‘You received my letters?’ she went on to ask. ‘I heard you had gone
from England, and could only hope your letters would be forwarded. Did
you get them?’

‘With the delay of only a day or two.’

‘And deliberately you put me aside?’

‘I did.’

She looked at him now for several moments. Her eyes grew moist. Then she
resumed, in a lower voice--

‘I said nothing of what was at stake, though I knew. Mr. Mutimer was
perfectly open with me. “I have trusted him implicitly,” he said,
“because I believe him as staunch and true as his brother. I make no
allowances for what are called young man’s follies: he must be above
anything of that kind. If he is not--well, I have been mistaken in
him, and I can’t deal with him as I wish to do.” You know what he was,
Hubert, and you can imagine him speaking those words. We waited. The bad
news was confirmed, and from you there came nothing. I would not hint at
the loss you were incurring; of my own purpose I should have refrained
from doing so, and Mr. Mutimer forbade me to appeal to anything but your
better self. If you would not come to me because I wished it, I could
not involve you and myself in shame by seeing you yield to sordid
motives.’

Hubert raised his head. A choking voice kept him silent for a moment
only.

‘Mother, the loss is nothing to you; you are above regrets of that kind;
and for myself, I am almost glad to have lost it.’

‘In very truth,’ answered the mother, ‘I care little about the wealth
you might have possessed. What I do care for is the loss of all the
hopes I had built upon you. I thought you honour itself; I thought you
high-minded. Young as you are, I let you go from me without a fear.
Hubert, I would have staked my life that no shadow of disgrace would
ever fall upon your head! You have taken from me the last comfort of my
age.’

He uttered words she could not catch.

‘The purity of your soul was precious to me,’ she continued, her accents
struggling against weakness; ‘I thought I had seen in you a love of that
chastity without which a man is nothing; and I ever did my best to keep
your eyes upon a noble ideal of womanhood. You have fallen. The simpler
duty, the point of every-day honour, I could not suppose that you would
fail in. From the day when you came of age, when Mr. Mutimer spoke to
you, saying that in every respect you would be as his son, and you, for
your part, accepted what he offered, you owed it to him to respect the
lightest of his reasonable wishes. The wish which was supreme in him
you have utterly disregarded. Is it that you failed to understand him? I
have thought of late of a way you had now and then when you spoke to
me about him; it has occurred to me that perhaps you did him less than
justice. Regard his position and mine, and tell me whether you think he
could have become so much to us if he had not been a gentleman in the
highest sense of the word. When Godfrey first of all brought me that
proposal from him that we should still remain in this house, it seemed
to me the most impossible thing. You know what it was that induced me to
assent, and what led to his becoming so intimate with us. Since then it
has been hard for me to remember that he was not one of our family. His
weak points it was not difficult to discover; but I fear you did
not understand what was noblest in his character. Uprightness,
clean-heartedness, good faith--these things he prized before everything.
In you, in one of your birth, he looked to find them in perfection.
Hubert, I stood shamed before him.’

The young man breathed hard, as if in physical pain. His eyes were fixed
in a wide absent gaze. Mrs. Eldon had lost all the severity of her face;
the profound sorrow of a pure and noble nature was alone to be read
there now.

‘What,’ she continued--‘what is this class distinction upon which we
pride ourselves? What does it mean, if not that our opportunities lead
us to see truths to which the eyes of the poor and ignorant are blind?
Is there nothing in it, after all--in our pride of birth and station?
That is what people are saying nowadays: you yourself have jested to me
about our privileges. You almost make me dread that you were right. Look
back at that man, whom I came to honour as my own father. He began
life as a toiler with his hands. Only a fortnight ago he was telling
me stories of his boyhood, of seventy years since. He was without
education; his ideas of truth and goodness he had to find within his own
heart. Could anything exceed the noble simplicity of his respect for me,
for you boys? We were poor, but it seemed to him that we had from nature
what no money could buy. He was wrong; his faith misled him. No, not
wrong with regard to all of us; my boy Godfrey was indeed all that he
believed. But think of himself; what advantage have we over him? I know
no longer what to believe. Oh, Hubert!’

He left his chair and walked to a more distant part of the room, where
he was beyond the range of lamp and firelight. Standing here, he pressed
his hand against his side, still breathing hard, and with difficulty
suppressing a groan.

He came a step or two nearer.

‘Mother,’ he said, hurriedly, ‘I am still far from well. Let me leave
you: speak to me again to-morrow.’

Mrs. Eldon made an effort to rise, looking anxiously into the gloom
where he stood. She was all but standing upright--a thing she had not
done for a long time--when Hubert sprang towards her, seizing her hands,
then supporting her in his arms. Her self-command gave way at length,
and she wept.

Hubert placed her gently in the chair and knelt beside her. He could
find no words, but once or twice raised his face and kissed her.

‘What caused your illness?’ she asked, speaking as one wearied with
suffering. She lay back, and her eyes were closed.

‘I cannot say,’ he answered. ‘Do not speak of me. In your last letter
there was no account of how he died.’

‘It was in church, at the morning service. The pew-opener found him
sitting there dead, when all had gone away.’

‘But the vicar could see into the pew from the pulpit? The death must
have been very peaceful.’

‘No, he could not see; the front curtains were drawn.’

‘Why was that, I wonder?’

Mrs. Eldon shook her head.

‘Are you in pain?’ she asked suddenly. ‘Why do you breathe so
strangely?’

‘A little pain. Oh, nothing; I will see Manns to-morrow.’

His mother gazed long and steadily into his eyes, and this time he bore
her look.

‘Mother, you have not kissed me,’ he whispered.

‘And cannot, dear. There is too much between us.’

His head fell upon her lap.

‘Hubert!’

He pressed her hand.

‘How shall I live when you have gone from me again? When you say
good-bye, it will be as if I parted from you for ever.’

Hubert was silent.

‘Unless,’ she continued--‘unless I have your promise that you will no
longer dishonour yourself.’

He rose from her side and stood in front of the fire; his mother looked
and saw that he trembled.

‘No promise, Hubert,’ she said, ‘that you cannot keep. Rather than that,
we will accept our fate, and be nothing to each other.’

‘You know very well, mother, that that is impossible. I cannot speak to
you of what drove me to disregard your letters. I love and honour you,
and shall have to change my nature before I cease to do so.’

‘To me, Hubert, you seem already to have changed. I scarcely know you.’

‘I can’t defend myself to you,’ he said sadly. ‘We think so differently
on subjects which allow of no compromise, that, even if I could speak
openly, you would only condemn me the more.’

His mother turned upon him a grief-stricken and wondering face.

‘Since when have we differed so?’ she asked. ‘What has made us strangers
to each other’s thoughts? Surely, surely you are at one with me in
condemning all that has led to this? If your character has been too weak
to resist temptation, you cannot have learnt to make evil your good?’

He kept silence.

‘You refuse me that last hope?’

Hubert moved impatiently.

‘Mother, I can’t see beyond to-day! I know nothing of what is before me.
It is the idlest trifling with words to say one will do this or that,
when action in no way depends on one’s own calmer thought. In this
moment I could promise anything you ask; if I had my choice, I would be
a child again and have no desire but to do your will, to be worthy in
your eyes. I hate my life and the years that have parted me from you.
Let us talk no more of it.’

Neither spoke again for some moments; then Hubert asked coldly--

‘What has been done?’

‘Nothing,’ replied Mrs. Eldon, in the same tone. ‘Mr. Yottle has waited
for your return before communicating with the relatives in London.’

‘I will go to Belwick in the morning,’ he said. Then, after reflection,
‘Mr. Mutimer told you that he had destroyed his will?’

‘No. He had it from Mr. Yottle two days before his death, and on the day
after--the Monday--Mr. Yottle was to have come to receive instructions
for a new one. It is nowhere to be found: of course it was destroyed.’

‘I suppose there is no doubt of that?’ Hubert asked, with a show of
indifference.

‘There can be none. Mr. Yottle tells me that a will which existed.
before Godfrey’s marriage was destroyed in the same way.’

‘Who is the heir?’

‘A great-nephew bearing the same name. The will contained provision for
him and certain of his family. Wanley is his; the personal property will
be divided among several.’

‘The people have not come forward?’

‘We presume they do not even know of Mr. Mutimer’s death. There has been
no direct communication between him and them for many years.’

Hubert’s next question was, ‘What shall you do, mother?’

‘Does it interest you, Hubert? I am too feeble to move very far. I must
find a home either here in the village or at Agworth.’

He looked at her with compassion, with remorse.

‘And you, my boy?’ asked his mother, raising her eyes gently.

‘I? Oh, the selfish never come to harm, be sure! Only the gentle and
helpless have to suffer; that is the plan of the world’s ruling.’

‘The world is not ruled by one who thinks our thoughts, Hubert.’

He had it on his lips to make a rejoinder, but checked the impulse.

‘Say good-night to me,’ his mother continued. ‘You must go and rest. If
you still feel unwell in the morning, a messenger shall go to Belwick.
You are very, very pale.’

Hubert held his hand to her and bent his head. Mrs. Eldon offered her
cheek; he kissed it and went from the room.

At seven o’clock on the following morning a bell summoned a servant to
Hubert’s bedroom. Though it was daylight, a lamp burned near the bed;
Hubert lay against pillows heaped high.

‘Let someone go at once for Dr. Manns,’ he said, appearing to speak with
difficulty. ‘I wish to see him as soon as possible. Mrs. Eldon is to
know nothing of his visit--you understand me!’

The servant withdrew. In rather less than an hour the doctor made his
appearance, with every sign of having been interrupted in his repose. He
was a spare man, full bearded and spectacled.

‘Something wrong?’ was his greeting as he looked keenly at his summoner.
‘I didn’t know you were here.’

‘Yes,’ Hubert replied, ‘something is confoundedly wrong. I have been
playing strange tricks in the night, I fancy.’

‘Fever?’

‘As a consequence of something else. I shall have to tell you what must
be repeated to no one, as of course you will see. Let me see, when
was it?--Saturday to-day? Ten days ago, I had a pistol-bullet just
here,’--he touched his right side. ‘It was extracted, and I seemed to be
not much the worse. I have just come from Germany.’

Dr. Manns screwed his face into an expression of sceptical amazement.

‘At present,’ Hubert continued, trying to laugh, ‘I feel considerably
the worse. I don’t think I could move if I tried. In a few minutes, ten
to one, I shall begin talking foolery. You must keep people away; get
what help is needed. I may depend upon you?’

The doctor nodded, and, whistling low, began an examination.


