


The making a virtue of necessity, though it argues lack of
ingenuousness, is perhaps preferable to the wholly honest demonstration
of snarling over one’s misfortunes. It may result in good even to the
hypocrite, who occasionally surprises himself with the pleasure he finds
in wearing a front of nobility, and is thereby induced to consider the
advantages of upright behaviour adopted for its own sake. Something of
this kind happened in the case of Richard Mutimer. Seeing that there was
no choice but to surrender his fortune, he set to work to make the most
of abdication, and with the result that the three weeks occupied in
settling his affairs at New Wanley and withdrawing from the Manor were
full of cheerful activity. He did not meet Hubert Eldon, all business
being transacted through Mr. Yottle. When he heard from the latter that
it was Eldon’s intention to make a clean sweep of mines, works, and
settlements, though for a moment chagrined, he speedily saw that such
action, by giving dramatic completeness to his career at Wanley and
investing its close with something of tragic pathos, was in truth what
he should most have desired. It enabled him to take his departure with
an air of profounder sadness; henceforth no gross facts would stand in
the way of his rhetoric when he should enlarge on the possibilities
thus nipped in the bud. He was more than ever a victim of cruel
circumstances; he could speak with noble bitterness of his life’s work
having been swept into oblivion.

He was supported by a considerable amount of epistolary sympathy. The
local papers made an interesting story of what had happened in the
old church at Wanley, and a few of the London journals reported the
circumstances; in this way Mutimer became known to a wider public than
had hitherto observed him. Not only did his fellow-Unionists write to
encourage and moralise, but a number of those people who are ever ready
to indite letters to people of any prominence, the honestly admiring and
the windily egoistic, addressed communications either to Wanley Manor or
to the editor of the ‘Fiery Cross.’ Mutimer read eagerly every word of
each most insignificant scribbler; his eyes gleamed and his cheeks
grew warm. All such letters he brought to Adela, and made her read
them aloud; he stood with his hands behind his back, his face slightly
elevated and at a listening angle. At the end he regarded her, and his
look said: ‘Behold the man who is your husband!’

But at length there came one letter distinct from all the rest; it had
the seal of a Government office. With eyes which scarcely credited what
they saw Mutimer read some twenty or thirty words from a Minister of the
Crown, a gentleman of vigorously Radical opinions, who had ‘heard
with much regret that the undertaking conceived and pursued with such
single-hearted zeal’ had come to an untimely end. Mutimer rushed to
Adela like a schoolboy who has a holiday to announce.

‘Read that now! What do you think of that? Now there’s some hope of a
statesman like that!’

Adela gave forth the letter in a voice which was all too steady. 7 But
she said:

‘I am very glad. It must gratify you. He writes very kindly.’

‘You’ll have to help me to make an answer.’

Adela smiled, but said nothing.

The ceremonious opening of the hall at New Wanley had been a great
day; Mutimer tried his best to make the closing yet more effective. Mr.
Westlake was persuaded to take the chair, but this time the oration was
by the founder himself. There was a numerous assembly. Mutimer spoke for
an hour and a quarter, reviewing what he had done, and enlarging on all
that he might and would have done. There was as much applause as even
he could desire. The proceedings closed with the reading of an address
which was signed by all the people of the works, a eulogium and an
expression of gratitude, not without one or two sentences of fiery
Socialism. The spokesman was a fine fellow of six feet two, a man named
Redgrave, the ideal of a revolutionist workman. He was one of the few
men at the works whom Adela, from observation of their domestic life,
had learnt sincerely to respect. Before reading the document he made a
little speech of his own, and said in conclusion:

‘Here’s an example of how the law does justice in a capitalist society.
The man who makes a grand use of money has it all taken away from him by
the man who makes no use of it at all, except to satisfy his own malice
and his own selfishness. If we don’t one and all swear to do our utmost
to change such a state of things as that, all I can say is we’re a poor
lot, and deserve to be worse treated than the animals, that haven’t the
sense to use their strength!’

In his reply to the address Richard surpassed himself. He rose in
excitement; the words that rushed to his lips could scarcely find
articulate flow. After the due thanks:

‘To-morrow I go to London; I go as poor as the poorest of you, a
mechanical engineer in search of work. Whether I shall find it or not
there’s no saying. If they turned me out because of my opinions three
years ago, it’s not very likely that they’ve grown fonder of me by this
time. As poor as the poorest of you, I say. Most of you probably know
that a small legacy is left to me under the will which gives this
property into other hands. That money will be used, every penny of it,
for the furtherance of our cause!’

It was a magnificent thought, one of those inspirations which reveal
latent genius. The hall echoed with shouts of glorification. Adela, who
sat with her mother and Letty (Mrs. Westlake had not accompanied her
husband), kept her eyes fixed on the ground; the uproar made her head
throb.

All seemed to be over and dispersal was beginning, when a gentleman
stood up in the middle of the hall and made signs that he wished to be
heard for a moment. Mutimer aided him in gaining attention. It was Mr.
Yottle, a grizzle-headed, ruddy-cheeked veteran of the law.

‘I merely desire to use this opportunity of reminding those who have
been employed at the works that Mr. Eldon will be glad to meet them in
this hall at half-past ten o’clock to-morrow morning. It will perhaps
be better if the men alone attend, as the meeting will be strictly for
business purposes.’

Adela was among the last to leave the room. As she was moving between
the rows of benches Mr. Westlake approached her. He had only arrived
in time to take his place on the platform, and he was on the point of
returning to London.

I have a note for you from Stella, he said. ‘She has been ailing for a
fortnight; it wasn’t safe for her to come. But she will soon see you, I
hope.’

‘I hope so,’ Adela replied mechanically, as she took the letter.

Mr. Westlake only added his ‘good-bye,’ and went to take leave of
Mutimer, who was standing at a little distance.

Among those who remained to talk with the hero of the day was our old
friend Keene. Keene had risen in the world, being at present sub-editor
of a Belwick journal. His appearance had considerably improved, and his
manner was more ornate than ever. He took Mutimer by the arm and led him
aside.

‘A suggestion--something that occurred to me whilst you were speaking.
You must write the history of New Wanley Not too long; a thing that
could be printed in pamphlet form and sold at a penny or twopence. Speak
to Westlake see if the Union won’t publish. Some simple title: “My Work
in New Wanley,” for instance. I’ll see that it’s well noticed in our
rag.’

‘Not a bad idea!’ Mutimer exclaimed, throwing back his head.

‘Trust me, not half bad. Be of use in the propaganda. Just think it
over, and, if you care to, allow me to read it in manuscript. There’s
a kind of art--eh? you know what I mean; it’s only to be got by
journalistic practice. Yes, “My Work in New Wanley”; I think that would
do.’

‘I’m going to lecture at Commonwealth Hall next Sunday,’ Mutimer
observed. ‘I’ll take that for my title.’

‘By-the-bye how--what was I going to say? Oh yes, how is Mrs. Rodman?’

‘Tolerable, I believe.’

‘In London, presumably?’

‘Yes.’

‘Not much--not taking it to heart much, I hope?’

‘Not particularly? I think.’

‘I should be glad to be remembered--a word when you see her. Thanks,
Mutimer, thanks. I must be off.’

Adela was making haste to Teach the Manor, that she might read
Stella’s letter She and her husband were to dine this evening with the
Walthams--a farewell meal. With difficulty she escaped from her mother
and Letty; Stella’s letter demanded a quarter of an hour of solitude.

She reached her room, and broke the envelope. Stella never wrote at much
length, but to-day there were only a few lines.

‘My love to you, heart’s darling. I am not well enough to come, and I
think it likely you had rather I did not. But in a few hours you will be
near me. Come as soon as ever you can. I wait for you like the earth for
spring. ‘STELLA.’

She kissed the paper and put it in the bosom of her dress. It was
already time to go to her mother’s.

She found her mother and Letty with grave faces; something seemed to
have disturbed them. Letty tried to smile and appear at ease, but Mrs.
Waltham was at no pains to hide the source of her dissatisfaction.

‘Did you know of that, Adela?’ she asked, with vexation. ‘About the
annuity, I mean. Had Richard spoken to you of his intention?’

Adela replied with a simple negative. She had not given the matter a
thought.

‘Then he certainly should have done. It was his duty, I consider,
to tell _me_. It is in express contradiction of all he has led me to
understand. What are you going to live on, I should like to know? It’s
very unlikely that he will find a position immediately. He is absolutely
reckless, wickedly thoughtless! My dear, it is not too late even now. I
insist on your staying with us until your husband has found an assured
income. The idea of your going to live in lodgings in an obscure part of
London is more than I can bear, and _now_ it really appals me. Adela,
my child, it’s impossible for you to go under these circumstances. The
commonest decency will oblige him to assent to this arrangement.’

‘My dear mother,’ Adela replied seriously, ‘pray do not reopen that. It
surely ought to be needless for me to repeat that it is my duty to go to
London.’

‘But, Adela darling,’ began Letty, very timorously, ‘wouldn’t it be
relieving your husband? How much freer he would be to look about,
knowing you are here safe and in comfort. I really--I do really think
mother is right.’

Before Adela could make any reply there sounded a knock at the front
door; Richard came in. He cast a glance round at the three. The
others might have escaped his notice, but Mrs. Waltham was too plainly
perturbed.

‘Has anything happened?’ he asked in an offhand way.

‘I am distressed, more than I can tell you,’ began his mother-in-law.
‘Surely you did not mean what you said about the money--’

‘Mother!’ came from Adela’s lips, but she checked herself.

Mutimer thrust his hands into his pockets and stood smiling.

‘Yes, I meant it.’

‘But, pray, what are you and Adela going to live upon?’

‘I don’t think we shall have any difficulty.’

‘But surely one must more than _think_ in a matter such as this. You
mustn’t mind me speaking plainly, Richard. Adela is my only daughter,
and the thought of her undergoing needless hardships is so dreadful to
me that I really must speak. I have a plan, and I am sure you will see
that it is the very best for all of us. Allow Adela to remain with me
for a little while, just till you have--have made things straight. It
certainly would ease your mind. She is so very welcome to a share of our
home. You would feel less hampered. I am sure you will consent to this.’

Mutimer’s smile died away. He avoided Mrs. Waltham’s face, and let his
eyes pass in a cold gaze from Letty, who almost shrank, to Adela, who
stood with an air of patience.

‘What do you say to this?’ he asked of his wife, in a tone civil indeed,
but very far from cordial.

‘I have been trying to show mother that I cannot do as she wishes. It
is very kind of her, but, unless you think it would be better for me to
stay, I shall of course accompany you.’

‘You can stay if you like.’

Adela understood too well what that permission concealed.

‘I have no wish to stay.’

Mutimer turned his look on Mrs. Waltham, without saying anything.

‘Then I can say no more,’ Mrs. Waltham replied. ‘But you must understand
that I take leave of my daughter with the deepest concern. I hope you
will remember that her health for a long time has been anything but
good, and that she was never accustomed to do hard and coarse work.’

‘We won’t talk any more of this, mother,’ Adela interposed firmly. ‘I am
sure you need have no fear that I shall be tried beyond my strength. You
must remember that I go with my husband.’

The high-hearted one! She would have died rather than let her mother
perceive that her marriage was less than happy. To the end she would
speak that word ‘my husband,’ when it was necessary to speak it at all,
with the confidence of a woman who knows no other safeguard against the
ills of life. To the end she would shield the man with her own dignity,
and protect him as far as possible even against himself.

Mutimer smiled again, this time with satisfaction.

‘I certainly think we can take care of ourselves,’ he remarked briefly.

In a few minutes they were joined by Alfred, who had only just returned
from Belwick, and dinner was served. It was not a cheerful evening.
At Adela’s request it had been decided in advance that the final
leave-taking should be to-night; she and Mutimer would drive to Agworth
station together with Alfred the first thing in the morning. At ten
o’clock the parting came. Letty could not speak for sobbing; she just
kissed Adela and hurried from the room. Mrs. Waltham preserved a rather
frigid stateliness.

‘Good-bye, my dear,’ she said, when released from her daughter’s
embrace. ‘I hope I may have good news from you.’

With Mutimer she shook hands.

It was a starry and cold night. The two walked side by side without
speaking. When they were fifty yards on their way, a figure came out of
a corner of the road, and Adela heard Letty call her name.

‘I will overtake you,’ she said to her husband.

‘Adela, my sweet, I _couldn’t_ say good-bye to you in the house!’

Letty hung about her dear one’s neck. Adela choked; she could only press
her cheek against that moist one.

‘Write to me often--oh, write often,’ Letty sobbed. ‘And tell me the
truth, darling, will you?’

‘It will be all well, dear sister,’ Adela whispered.

‘Oh, that is a dear name! Always call me that. I can’t say good-bye,
darling. You will come to see us as soon as ever you can?’

‘As soon as I can, Letty.’

Adela found her husband awaiting her.

‘What did she want?’ he asked, with genuine surprise.

‘Only to say good-bye.’

‘Why, she’d said it once.’

The interior of the Manor was not yet disturbed, but all the furniture
was sold, and would be taken away on the morrow. They went to the
drawing room. After some insignificant remarks Mutimer asked:

‘What letter was that Westlake gave you?’

‘It was from Stella--from Mrs. Westlake.’

He paused. Then:

‘Will you let me see it?’

‘Certainly, if you wish.’

She felt for it in her bosom and handed it to him. It shook in her
fingers.

‘Why does she think you’d rather she didn’t come?’

‘I suppose because the occasion seems to her painful.’

‘I don’t see that it was painful at all. What did you think of my
speech?’

‘The first one or the second?’

‘Both, if you like. I meant the first.’

‘You told the story very well.’

‘You’ll never spoil me by over-praise.’

Adela was silent.

‘About this,’ he resumed, tapping the note which he still held. ‘I
don’t think you need go there very often. It seems to me you don’t get
much good from them.’

She looked at him inquiringly.

‘Theirs isn’t the kind of Socialism I care much about,’ he continued,
with the air of giving a solid reason. ‘It seems to me that Westlake’s
going off on a road of his own, and one that leads nowhere. All that
twaddle to-day about the development of society! I don’t think he spoke
of me as he might have done. You’ll see there won’t be half a report in
the “Fiery Gross.”’

Adela was still silent.

‘I don’t mean to say you’re not to see Mrs. Westlake at all, if you want
to,’ he pursued. ‘I shouldn’t have thought she was the kind of woman
to suit you. If the truth was known, I don’t think she’s a Socialist at
all. But then, no more are you, eh?’

‘There is no one with a more passionate faith in the people than Mrs.
Westlake,’ Adela returned.

‘Faith! That won’t do much good.’

He was silent a little, then went to another subject.

‘Rodman writes that he’s no intention of giving up the money. I knew it
would come to that.’

‘But the law will compel him,’ Adela exclaimed.

‘It’s a roundabout business. Eldon’s only way of recovering it is to
bring an action against me. Then I shall have to go to law with Rodman.’

‘But how can he refuse? It is--’

She checked herself, remembering that words were two-edged.

‘Oh, he writes in quite a friendly way--makes a sort of joke of it.
We’ve to get what we can of him, he says. But he doesn’t get off if I
can help it. I must see Yottle on our way tomorrow.’

‘Keene wants me to write a book about New Wanley,’ he said presently.

‘A book?’

‘Well, a small one. It could be called, “My Work at New Wanley.” It
might do good.’

‘Yes, it might,’ Adela assented absently.

‘You look tired. Get off to bed; you’ll have to be up early in the
morning, and it’ll be a hard day.’

Adela went, hopeful of oblivion till the ‘hard day’ should dawn.

The next morning they were in Belwick by half-past nine. Alfred took
leave of them and went off to business. He promised to ‘look them up’ in
London before very long, probably at Christmas. Between him and Mutimer
there was make-believe of cordiality at parting; they had long ceased to
feel any real interest in each other.

Adela had to spend the time in the railway waiting-room whilst her
husband went to see Yottle. It was a great bare place; when she entered,
she found a woman in mourning, with a little boy, sitting alone. The
child was eating a bun, his mother was silently shedding tears. Adela
seated herself as far from them as possible, out of delicacy, but she
saw the woman look frequently towards her, and at last rise as if
to come and speak. She was a feeble, helpless-looking being of about
thirty; evidently the need of sympathy overcame her, for she had no
other excuse for addressing Adela save to tell that her luggage had gone
astray, and that she was waiting in the hope that something might be
heard of it. Finding a gentle listener, she talked on and on, detailing
the wretched circumstances under which she had recently been widowed,
and her miserable prospects in a strange town whither she was going.
Adela made an effort to speak in words of comfort, but her own voice
sounded hopeless in her ears. In the station was a constant roaring and
hissing, bell-ringing and the shriek of whistles, the heavy trundling of
barrows, the slamming of carriage-doors; everywhere a smell of smoke.
It impressed her as though all the ‘world had become homeless, and
had nothing to do but journey hither and thither in vain search of a
resting-place. And her waiting lasted more than an hour. But for the
effort to dry another’s tears it would have been hard to restrain her
own.

The morning had threatened rain; when at length the journey to London
began, the black skies yielded a steady downpour Mutimer was anything
but cheerful; establishing himself in a corner of the third-class
carriage, he for a time employed himself with a newspaper; then,
throwing it on to Adela’s lap, closed his eyes as if he hoped to sleep.
Adela glanced up and down the barren fields of type, but there was
nothing that could hold her attention, and, by chance looking at her
husband’s face, she continued to examine it. Perhaps he was asleep,
perhaps only absorbed in thought. His lips were sullenly loose beneath
the thick reddish moustache his eyebrows had drawn themselves together,
scowling. She could not avert her gaze; it seemed to her that she was
really scrutinising his face for the first time, and it was as that of
a stranger. Not one detail had the stamp of familiarity: the whole
repelled her. What was the meaning now first revealed to her in that
countenance? The features had a massive regularity; there was nothing
grotesque, nothing on the surface repulsive; yet, beholding the face as
if it were that of a man unknown to her, she felt that a whole world of
natural antipathies was between it and her.

It was the face of a man by birth and breeding altogether beneath her.

Never had she understood that as now; never had she conceived so
forcibly the reason which made him and her husband and wife only in
name. Suppose that apparent sleep of his to be the sleep of death; he
would pass from her consciousness like a shadow from the field, leaving
no trace behind. Their life of union was a mockery; their married
intimacy was an unnatural horror. He was not of her class, not of her
world; only by violent wrenching of the laws of nature had they come
together. She had spent years in trying to convince herself that there
were no such distinctions, that only an unworthy prejudice parted class
from class. One moment of true insight was worth more than all her
theorising on abstract principles. To be her equal this man must be
born again, of other parents, in other conditions of life. ‘I go back
to London a mechanical engineer in search of employment.’ They were the
truest words he had ever uttered; they characterised him, classed him.

She had no claims to aristocratic descent, but her parents were
gentlefolk; that is to say, they were both born in a position which
encouraged personal refinement rather than the contrary, which expected
of them a certain education in excess of life’s barest need, which
authorised them to use the service of ruder men and women in order to
secure to themselves a margin of life for life’s sake. Perhaps for three
generations her ancestors could claim so much gentility; it was more
than enough to put a vast gulf between her and the Mutimers. Favourable
circumstances of upbringing had endowed her with delicacy of heart
and mind not inferior to that of any woman living; mated with an equal
husband, the children born of her might hope to take their place among
the most beautiful and the most intelligent. And her husband was a man
incapable of understanding her idlest thought.

He opened his eyes, looked at her blankly for a moment, stirred his
limbs to make his position easier.

Pouring rain in London streets. The cab drove eastward, but for no great
distance. Adela found herself alighting at a lodging-house not far from
the reservoir at the top of Pentonville Hill. Mutimer had taken these
rooms a week ago.

A servant fresh from the blackleading of a grate opened the door to
them, grinning with recognition at the sight of Mutimer. The latter had
to help the cabman to deposit the trunks in the passage. Then Adela was
shown to her bedroom.

It was on the second floor, the ordinary bedroom of cheap furnished
lodgings, with scant space between the foot of the bed and the
fireplace, with a dirty wall-paper and a strong musty odour. The window
looked upon a backyard.

She passed from the bedroom to the sitting-room; here was the same
vulgar order, the same musty smell. The table was laid for dinner.

Mutimer read his wife’s countenance furtively. He could not discover how
the abode impressed her, and he put no question. When he returned from
the bedroom she was sitting before the fire, pensive.

‘You’re hungry, I expect?’ he said.

Her appetite was far from keen, but in order not to appear discontented
she replied that she would be glad of dinner.

The servant, her hands and face half washed, presently appeared with a
tray on which were some mutton-chops, potatoes, and a cabbage. Adela did
her best to eat, but the chops were ill-cooked, the vegetables poor in
quality. There followed a rice-pudding; it was nearly cold; coagulated
masses of rice appeared beneath yellowish water. Mutimer made no remark
about the food till the table was cleared. Then he said:

‘They’ll have to do better than that. The first day, of course--You’ll
have a talk with the landlady whilst I’m out to-night. Just let her see
that you won’t be content with _anything_; you have to talk plainly to
these people.’

‘Yes, I’ll speak about it,’ Adela replied.

‘They made a trouble at first about waiting on us,’ Mutimer pursued.
‘But I didn’t see how we could get our own meals very well. You can’t
cook, can you?’

He smiled, and seemed half ashamed to ask the question.

‘Oh yes; I can cook ordinary things,’ Adela said. ‘But--we haven’t a
kitchen, have we?’

‘Well, no. If we did anything of that kind, it would have to be on this
fire. She charges us four shillings a week more for cooking the dinner.’

He added this information in a tone of assumed carelessness.

‘I think we might save that,’ Adela said. ‘If I had the necessary
things--I should like to try, if you will let me.’

‘Just as you please. I don’t suppose the stuff they send us up will ever
be very eatable. But it’s too bad to ask you to do work of that kind.’

‘Oh, I shan’t mind it in the least! It will be far better, better in
every way.’

Mutimer brightened up.

‘In that case we’ll only get them to do the housemaid work. You can
explain that to the woman; her name is Mrs. Gulliman.’

He paused.

‘Think you can make yourself at home, here?’

‘Yes, certainly.’

‘That’s all right. I shall go out now for an hour or so. You can unpack
your boxes and get things in order a bit.’

Adela had her interview with Mrs. Gulliman in the course of the
evening, and fresh arrangements were made, not perhaps to the landlady’s
satisfaction, though she made a show of absorbing interest and vast
approval. She was ready to lend her pots and pans till Adela should have
made purchase of those articles.

Adela had the satisfaction of saving four shillings a week.

Two days later Mutimer sought eagerly in the ‘Fiery Gross’ for a report
of the proceedings at New Wanley. Only half a column was given to the
subject, the speeches being summarised. He had fully expected that the
week’s ‘leader’ would be concerned with his affairs, but there was no
mention of him.

He bought the ‘Tocsin.’ Foremost stood an article headed, ‘The Bursting
of a Soap Bubble.’ It was a satirical review of the history of New
Wanley, signed by Comrade Roodhouse. He read in one place: ‘Undertakings
of this kind, even if pursued with genuine enthusiasm, are worse than
useless; they are positively pernicious. They are half measures, and can
only result in delaying the Revolution. It is assumed that working-men
can be kept in a good temper with a little better housing and a little
more money. That is to aid the capitalists, to smooth over huge wrongs
with petty concessions, to cry peace where there is no peace. We know
this kind of thing of old. It is the whole system of wage-earning that
must be overthrown--the ideas which rule the relations of employers
and employed. Away with these palliatives; let us rejoice when we see
working men starving and ill-clad, for in that way their eyes will be
opened. The brute who gets the uttermost farthing out of the toil of his
wage-slaves is more a friend to us and our cause than any namby-pamby
Socialist, such as the late Dukeling of New Wanley. Socialist indeed!
But enough. We have probably heard the last of this _parvenu_ and
his loudly trumpeted schemes. No true friend of the Revolution can be
grieved.’

Mutimer bit his lip.

‘Heard the last of me, have they? Don’t be too hasty, Roodhouse.’


