


Mr. Willis Rodman scarcely relished the process which deprived him
of his town house and of the greater part of his means, but his
exasperation happily did not seek vent for itself in cruelty to his
wife. It might very well have done so, would all but certainly, had not
Alice appealed to his sense of humour by her zeal in espousing his cause
against her brother. That he could turn her round his finger was an old
experience, but to see her spring so actively to arms on his behalf,
when he was conscious that she had every excuse for detesting him, and
even abandoning him, struck him as a highly comical instance of his
power over women, a power on which he had always prided himself. He
could not even explain it as self-interest in her; numberless things
proved the contrary. Alice was still his slave, though he had not given
himself the slightest trouble to preserve even her respect. He had shown
himself to her freely as he was, jocosely cynical on everything that
women prize, brutal when he chose to give way to his temper, faithless
on principle, selfish to the core; perhaps the secret of the fascination
he exercised over her was his very ingenuousness, his boldness in
defying fortune, his clever grasp of circumstances. She said to him one
day, when he had been telling her that as likely as not she might have
to take in washing or set up a sewing-machine:

‘I am not afraid. You can always get money. There’s nothing you can’t
do.’

He laughed.

‘That may be true. But how if I disappear some day and leave you to take
care of yourself?’

He had often threatened this in his genial way, and it never failed to
blanch her cheeks.

‘If you do that,’ she said, ‘I shall kill myself.’

At which he laughed yet more loudly.

In her house at Wimbledon she perished of _ennui_, for she was as lonely
as Adela in Holloway. Much lonelier; she had no resources in herself.
Rodman was away all day in London, and very often he did not return at
night; when the latter was the case, Alice cried miserably in her bed
for hours, so that the next morning her face was like that of a wax doll
that has suffered ill-usage. She had an endless supply of novels, and
day after day bent over them till her head ached. Poor Princess! She had
had her own romance, in its way brilliant and strange enough, but only
the rags of it were left. She clung to them, she hoped against hope that
they would yet recover their gloss and shimmer. If only he would not so
neglect her! All else affected her but little now that she really knew
what it meant to see her husband utterly careless, not to be held by
any pettings or entreaties. She heard through him of her brother ‘Arry’s
disgrace; it scarcely touched her. Her brother Richard she was never
tired of railing against, railed so much, indeed, that it showed she
by no means hated him as much as she declared. But nothing would have
mattered if only her husband had cared for her.

She had once said to Adela that she disliked children and hoped never
to have any. It was now her despair that she remained childless. Perhaps
that was why he had lost all affection?

In the summer Rodman once quitted her for nearly three weeks, during
which she only heard from him once. He was in Ireland, and, he asserted,
on business. The famous ‘Irish Dairy Company,’ soon to occupy a share of
public attention, was getting itself on foot. It was Rodman who promoted
the company and who became its secretary, though the name of that
functionary in all printed matter appeared as ‘Robert Delancey.’
However, I only mention it for the present to explain our friend’s
absence in Ireland. Alice often worked herself up to a pitch of terror
lest her husband had fulfilled his threat and really deserted her. He
returned when it suited him to do so, and tortured her with a story of a
wealthy Irish widow who had fallen desperately in love with him.

‘And I’ve a good mind to marry her,’ he added with an air of serious
reflection. Of course I didn’t let her know my real name. I could manage
it very nicely, and you would never know anything about it; I should
remit you all the money you wanted, you needn’t be afraid.’

Alice tried to assume a face of stony indignation, but as usual she
ended by breaking down and shedding tears. Then he told her that she
was getting plainer than ever, and that it all came of her perpetual
‘water-works.’

Alice hit upon a brilliant idea. What if she endeavoured to make him
jealous? In spite of her entreaties, he never would take her to town,
though he saw that she was perishing for lack of amusement. Suppose
she made him believe that she had gone on her own account, and at the
invitation of someone whose name she would not divulge? I believe she
found the trick in one of her novels. The poor child went to work
most conscientiously. One morning when he came down to breakfast she
pretended to have been reading a letter, crushed an old envelope into
her pocket on his entering the room, and affected confusion. He observed
her.

‘Had a letter?’ he asked.

‘Yes--no. Nothing of any importance.’

He smiled and applied himself to the ham, then left her in his ordinary
way, without a word of courtesy, and went to town. She had asked him
particularly when he should be back that night He named the train, which
reached Wimbledon a little after ten.

They had only one servant. Alice took the girl into her confidence, said
she was going to play a trick, and it must not be spoilt. By ten o’clock
at night she was dressed for going out, and when she heard her husband’s
latch-key at the front door she slipped out at the back. It was her plan
to walk about the roads for half an hour, then to enter and--make the
best of the situation.

Rodman, unable to find his wife, summoned the servant.

‘Where is your mistress?’

‘Out, sir.’

He examined the girl shrewdly, with his eyes and with words. It was
perfectly true that women--of a kind--could not resist him. In the end
he discovered exactly what had happened. He laughed his wonted laugh of
cynical merriment.

‘Go to bed,’ he said to the servant. ‘And if you hear anyone at the
door, pay no attention.’

Then he locked up the house, front and back, and, having extinguished
all lights except a small lantern by which he could read in the
sitting-room without danger of its being discerned from outside, sat
down with a sense of amusement. Presently there came a ring at the
bell; it was repeated again and again. The month was October, the night
decidedly cool. Rodman chuckled to himself; he had a steaming glass of
whisky before him and sipped it delicately. The ringing continued for a
quarter of an hour, then five minutes passed, and no sound came. Rodman
stepped lightly to the front door, listened, heard nothing, unlocked and
opened. Alice was standing in the middle of the road, her hands crossed
over her breast and holding her shoulders as though she suffered from
the cold. She came forward and entered the house without speaking.

In the sitting-room she found the lantern and looked at her husband in
surprise. His face was stern.

‘What’s all this?’ he asked sharply.

‘I’ve been to London,’ she answered, her teeth chattering with cold and
her voice uncertain from fear.

‘Been to London? And what business had you to go without telling me?’

He spoke savagely. Alice was sinking with dread, but even yet had
sufficient resolve to keep up the comedy.

‘I had an invitation. I don’t see why I shouldn’t go. I don’t ask you
who you go about with.’

The table was laid for supper. Rodman darted to it, seized a
carving-knife, and in an instant was holding it to her throat. She
shrieked and fell upon her knees, her face ghastly with mortal terror.
Then Rodman burst out laughing and showed that his anger had been
feigned.

She had barely strength to rise, but at length stood before him
trembling and sobbing, unable to believe that he had not been in
earnest.

‘You needn’t explain the trick,’ he said, with the appearance of great
good-humour, ‘but just tell me why you played it. Did you think I should
believe you were up to something queer, eh?’

‘You must think what you like,’ she sobbed, utterly humiliated.

He roared with laughter.

‘What a splendid idea! The Princess getting tired of propriety and
making appointments in London! Little fool! do you think I should care
one straw? Why shouldn’t you amuse yourself?’

Alice looked at him with eyes of wondering misery.

‘Do you mean that you don’t care enough for me to--to--’

‘Don’t care one farthing’s worth! And to think you went and walked about
in the mud and the east wind! Well, if that isn’t the best joke I ever
heard! I’ll have a rare laugh over this story with some men I know
to-morrow.’

She crept away to her bedroom. He had gone far towards killing the love
that had known no rival in her heart.

He bantered her ceaselessly through breakfast next morning, and for the
first time she could find no word to reply to him. Her head drooped;
she touched nothing on the table. Before going off he asked her what the
appointment was for to-day, and advised her not to forget her latch-key.
Alice scarcely heard him, she was shame-stricken and wobegone.

Rodman, on the other hand, had never been in better spirits. The ‘Irish
Dairy Company’ was attracting purchasers of shares. It was the kind of
scheme which easily recommended itself to a host of the foolish people
who are ever ready to risk their money, also to some not quite so
foolish. The prospectus could show some respectable names: one or two
Irish lords, a member of Parliament, some known capitalists. The profits
could not but be considerable, and think of the good to ‘the unhappy
sister country’--as the circular said. Butter, cheese, eggs of
unassailable genuineness, to be sold in England at absurdly low prices,
yet still putting the producers on a footing of comfort and proud
independence. One of the best ideas that had yet occurred to Mr. Robert
Delancey.

He--the said Mr. Delancey, _alias_ Mr. Willis Rodman, _alias_ certain
other names--spent much of his time just now in the society of a Mr.
Hilary, a gentleman who, like himself, had seen men and manners in
various quarters of the globe, and was at present making a tolerable
income by the profession of philanthropy. Mr. Hilary’s name appeared
among the directors of the company; it gave confidence to many who were
familiar with it in connection with not a few enterprises started for
the benefit of this or that depressed nationality, this or the other
exploited class. He wrote frequently to the newspapers on the most
various subjects; he was known to members of Parliament through his
persistent endeavours to obtain legislation with regard to certain
manufactures proved to be gravely deleterious to the health of those
employed in them. To-day Mr. Delancey and Mr. Hilary passed some hours
together in the latter’s chambers. Their talk was of the company.

‘So you saw Mutimer about it?’ Rodman asked, turning to a detail in
which he was specially interested.

‘Yes. He is anxious to have shares.’

Mr. Hilary was a man of past middle age, long-bearded, somewhat
cadaverous of hue. His head was venerable.

‘You were careful not to mention me?’

‘I kept your caution in mind.’

Their tone to each other was one of perfect gravity. Mr. Hilary even
went out of his way to choose becoming phrases.

‘He won’t have anything to do with it if he gets to know who R. Delancey
is.’

‘I was prudent, believe me. I laid before him the aspects of the
undertaking which would especially interest him. I made it clear to
him that our enterprise is no less one of social than of commercial
importance; he entered into our views very heartily. The first time I
saw him, I merely invited him to glance over our prospectus; yesterday
he was more than willing to join our association--and share our
profits.’

‘Did he tell you how much he’d got out of those poor devils over there?’

‘A matter of sixty pounds, I gathered. I am not a little astonished at
his success.’

‘Oh, he’d talk the devil himself into subscribing to a mission if it
suited him to try.’

‘He is clearly very anxious to get the highest interest possible for his
money. His ideas on business seemed, I confess, rather vague. I did my
best to help him with suggestions.’

‘Of course.’

‘He talked of taking some five hundred pounds’ worth of shares on his
own account.’

The men regarded each other. Rodman’s lips curled; Mr. Hilary was as
grave as ever.

‘You didn’t balk him?’

‘I commended his discretion.’

Rodman could not check a laugh.

‘I am serious,’ said Mr. Hilary. ‘It may take a little time, but--’

‘Just so. Did he question you at all about what we were doing?’

‘A good deal. He said he should go and look over the Stores in the
Strand.’

‘By all means. He’s a clever man if he distinguishes between Irish
butter and English butterine--I’m sure I couldn’t. And things really are
looking up at the Stores?’

‘Oh, distinctly.’

‘By-the-by, I had rather a nasty letter from Lord Mountorry yesterday.
He’s beginning to ask questions: wants to know when we’re going to
conclude our contract with that tenant of his--I’ve forgotten the
fellow’s name.’

‘Well, that must be looked into. There’s perhaps no reason why the
contract should not be concluded. Little by little we may come to
justify our name; who knows? In the meantime, we at all events do a
_bona fide_ business.’

‘Strictly so.’

Rodman had a good deal of business on hand besides that which arose from
his connection with Irish dairies. If Alice imagined him strolling
at his ease about the fashionable lounges of the town, she was much
mistaken. He worked hard and enjoyed his work, on the sole condition
that he was engaged in overreaching someone. This flattered his humour.

He could not find leisure to dine till nearly nine o’clock. He had made
up his mind not to return to Wimbledon, but to make use of a certain
_pied-a-terre_ which he had in Pimlico. His day’s work ended in
Westminster, he dined at a restaurant with a friend. Afterwards
billiards were proposed. They entered a house which Rodman did not know,
and were passing before the bar to go to the billiard-room, when a
man who stood there taking refreshment called out, ‘Hollo, Rodman!’ To
announce a man’s name in this way is a decided breach of etiquette in
the world to which Rodman belonged. He looked annoyed, and would have
passed on, but his acquaintance, who had perhaps exceeded the limits
of modest refreshment, called him again and obliged him to approach the
bar. As he did so Rodman happened to glance at the woman who stood ready
to fulfil the expected order. The glance was followed by a short but
close scrutiny, after which he turned his back and endeavoured by a sign
to draw his two acquaintances away. But at the same moment the barmaid
addressed him.

‘What is yours, Mr. Rodman?’

He shrugged his shoulders, muttered a strong expression, and turned
round again. The woman met his look steadily. She was perhaps thirty,
rather tall, with features more refined than her position would have
led one to expect. Her figure was good but meagre; her cheeks were very
thin, and the expression of her face, not quite amiable at any time, was
at present almost fierce. She seemed about to say something further, but
restrained herself.

Rodman recovered his good temper.

‘How do, Clara?’ he said, keeping his eye fixed on hers. ‘I’ll have a
drop of absinthe, if you please.’

Then he pursued his conversation with the two men. The woman, having
served them, disappeared. Rodman kept looking for her. In a few minutes
he pretended to recollect an engagement and succeeded in going off
alone. As he issued on to the pavement he found himself confronted by
the barmaid, who now wore a hat and cloak.

‘Well?’ he said, carelessly.

‘Rodman’s your name, is it?’ was the reply.

‘To my particular friends. Let’s walk on; we can’t chat here very well.’

‘What is to prevent me from calling that policeman and giving you in
charge?’ she asked, looking into his face with a strange mixture of
curiosity and anger.

‘Nothing, except that you have no charge to make against me. The law
isn’t so obliging as all that. Come, we’ll take a walk.’

She moved along by his side.

‘You coward!’ she exclaimed, passionately but with none of the shrieking
virulence of women who like to make a scene in the street. ‘You mean,
contemptible, cold-blooded man! I suppose you hoped I was starved to
death by this time, or in the workhouse, or--what did _you_ care where I
was! I knew I should find you some day.’

‘I rather supposed you would stay on the other side of the water,’
Rodman remarked, glancing at her. ‘You’re changed a good deal. Now it’s
a most extraordinary thing. Not so very long ago I was dreaming about
you, and you were serving at a bar--queer thing, wasn’t it?’

They were walking towards Whitehall. When they came at length into an
ill-lighted and quiet spot, the woman stopped.

‘Where do you live?’ she asked.

‘Live? Oh, just out here in Pimlico. Like to see my rooms?’

‘What do you mean by talking to me like that? Do you make a joke of
deserting your wife and child for seven years, leaving them without a
penny, going about enjoying yourself, when, for anything you knew, they
were begging their bread? You always were heartless--it was the blackest
day of my life that I met you; and you ask me if I’d like to see your
rooms! What thanks to you that I’m not as vile a creature as there is in
London? How was I to support myself and the child? What was I to do when
they turned me into the streets of New York because I couldn’t pay what
you owed them nor the rent of a room to sleep in? You took good care
_you_ never went hungry. I’d only one thing to hold me up: I was an
honest woman, and I made up my mind I’d keep honest, though I had such
a man as you for my husband. I’ve hungered and worked, and I’ve made a
living for myself and my child as best I could. I’m not like you: I’ve
done nothing to disgrace myself. Now I will slave no more. You won’t
run away from me this time. Leave me for a single night, and I go to the
nearest police-station and tell all I know about you. If I wasn’t a fool
I’d do it now. But I’ve hungered and worked for seven years, and now
it’s time _my husband_ did something for me.’

‘You always had a head for argument, Clara,’ he replied coolly. ‘But
I can’t get over that dream of mine. Really a queer thing, wasn’t it?
Who’d have thought of you turning barmaid? With your education, I should
have thought you could have done something in the teaching line. Never
mind. The queerest thing of all is that I’m really half glad to see you.
How’s Jack?’

The extraordinary conversation went on as they walked towards the street
where Clara lived. It was in a poor part of Westminster. Reaching the
house, Clara opened the door with a latchkey.

Two women were standing in the passage.

‘This is my husband, Mrs. Rook,’ Clara said to one of them. ‘He’s just
got back from abroad.’

‘Glad to see you, Mr. Williamson,’ said the landlady, scrutinising him
with unmistakable suspicion.

The pair ascended the stairs, and Mrs. Williamson--she had always used
the name she received in marriage--opened a door which disclosed a dark
bedroom. A voice came from within--the voice of a little lad of eight
years old.

‘That you, mother? Why, I’ve only just put myself to bed. What time is
it?’

‘Then you ought to have gone to bed long ago,’ replied his mother whilst
she was striking a light.

It was a very small room, but decent. The boy was discovered sitting up
in bed--a bright-faced little fellow with black hair. Clara closed the
door, then turned and looked at her husband. The light made a glistening
appearance on her eyes; she had become silent, allowing facts to speak
for themselves.

The child stared at the stranger in astonishment.

‘Who are you?’ he asked at length.

Rodman laughed as heartily as if there had been nothing disagreeable in
the situation.

‘I have the honour to be your father, sir,’ he replied. ‘You’re a fine
boy, Jack--a deuced fine boy.’

The child was speechless. Rodman turned to the mother. Her hands held
the rail at the foot of the bed, and as the boy looked up at her for
explanation she let her face fall upon them and sobbed.

‘If you’re father come back,’ exclaimed Jack indignantly, ‘why do you
make mother cry?’

Rodman was still mirthful.

‘I like you, Jack,’ he said. ‘You’ll make a man some day. Do you mind if
I smoke a cigar, Clara?’

To his astonishment, he felt a weakness which had to be resisted;
tobacco suggested itself as a resource. When he had struck a light,
his wife forced back her tears and seated herself with an unforgiving
countenance.

Rodman began to chat pleasantly as he smoked.

Decidedly it was a _contretemps_. It introduced a number of difficulties
into his life. If he remained away for a night, he had little doubt that
his wife would denounce him; she knew of several little matters which
he on the whole preferred to be reticent about. She was not a woman like
Alice, to be turned round his finger. It behoved him to be exceedingly
cautious.

He had three personalities. As Mr. Willis Rodman his task was
comparatively a light one, at all events for the present. He merely
informed Alice by letter that he was kept in town by business and would
see her in the course of a week. It was very convenient that Alice
had no intercourse with her relatives. Secondly, as Mr. Williamson his
position was somewhat more difficult. Not only had he to present himself
every night at the rooms he had taken in Brixton, but it was necessary
to take precautions lest his abode should be discovered by those who
might make awkward use of the knowledge. He had, moreover, to keep Clara
in the dark as to his real occupations and prevent her from knowing
his resorts in town. Lastly, as Mr. Robert Delancey he had to deal with
matters of a very delicate nature indeed, in themselves quite enough to
occupy a man’s mental energy. But our friend was no ordinary man. If you
are not as yet satisfied of that, it will ere long be made abundantly
clear to you.

His spirits were as high as ever. When he said--with an ingenious
brutality all his own--that he was more than half glad to see his wife,
he, for a wonder, told the truth. But perhaps it was little Jack
who gave him most pleasure, and did most to reconcile him to the
difficulties of his situation. In a day or two be conquered the child’s
affections so completely that Jack seemed to care little for his mother
in comparison; Jack could not know the hardships she had endured for
his sake. Rodman--so we will continue to call him for convenience’
sake--already began to talk of what he would make the lad, who certainly
gave promise of parts. The result of this was that for a week or two our
friend became an exemplary family man. His wife almost dared to believe
that her miseries were over. Yet she watched him with lynx eyes.

The ‘Irish Dairy Company’ flourished. Rodman rubbed his hands with a
sinister satisfaction when he inscribed among the shareholders the name
of Richard Mutimer, who invested all the money he had collected from the
East-Enders, and three hundred pounds of his own--not five hundred,
as he had at first thought of doing. Mutimer had the consent of his
committee, whom he persuaded without much difficulty--the money was
not theirs--that by this means he would increase his capital beyond all
expectation. He told Adela what he had done.

‘There’s not the least risk. They’ve got the names of several lords! And
it isn’t a mere commercial undertaking: the first object is to benefit
the Irish; so that there can be nothing against my principles in it.
They promise a dividend of thirty per cent. What a glorious day it will
be when I tell the people what I have made of their money! Now confess
that it isn’t everyone could have hit on this idea.’

Of course he made no public announcement of his speculation: that would
have been to spoil the surprise. But he could not refrain from talking
a good deal about the Company to his friends. He explained with zeal
the merit of the scheme; it was dealing directly with the producers, the
poor small-farmers who could never get fair treatment. He saw a great
deal of Mr. Hilary, who was vastly interested in his East-End work. A
severe winter had begun. Threepenny bits came in now but slowly, and
Mutimer exerted himself earnestly to relieve the growing want in what
he called his ‘parishes.’ He began in truth to do some really good work,
moving heaven and earth to find employment for those long out of it, and
even bestowing money of his own. At night he would return to Holloway
worn out, and distress Adela with descriptions of the misery he had
witnessed.

‘I’m not sorry for it,’ he once exclaimed. ‘I cannot be sorry. Let
things get worse and worse the mending’ll be all the nearer. Why don’t
they march in a body to the West End? I don’t mean march in a violent
sense, though that’ll have to come, I expect. But why don’t they make a
huge procession and go about the streets in an orderly way--just to let
it be seen what their numbers are--just to give the West End a hint?
I’ll propose that one of these days. It’ll be a risky business, but we
can’t think of that when thousands are half starving. I could lead them,
I feel sure I could! It wants someone with authority over them, and I
think I’ve got that. There’s no telling what I may do yet. I say, Adela,
bow would it sound--“Richard Mutimer, First President of the English
Republic”?’

And in the meantime Alice sat in her house at Wimbledon, abandoned.
The solitude seemed to be driving her mad. Rodman came down very
occasionally for a few hours in the daytime, but never passed a night
with her. He told her he had a great affair on hand, a very great
affair, which was to make their fortunes ten times over. She must be
patient; women couldn’t understand business. If she resisted his coaxing
and grumbled, he always had his threat ready. He would realise his
profits and make off, leaving her in the lurch. Weeks became months.
In pique at the betrayal of her famous stratagem, Alice had wanted to
dismiss her servant, but Rodman objected to this. She was driven by
desperation to swallow her pride and make a companion of the girl. But
she did not complain to her of her husband--partly out of self-respect,
partly because she was afraid to. Indeed it was a terrible time for the
poor Princess. She spent the greater part of every day in a state of
apathy; for the rest she wept. Many a time she was on the point of
writing to Richard, but could not quite bring herself to that. She could
not leave the house, for it rained or snowed day after day; the sun
seemed to have deserted the heavens as completely as joy her life. She
grew feeble-minded, tried to amuse herself with childish games, played
‘Beggar My Neighbour’ with the servant for hours at night. She had fits
of hysteria, and terrified her sole companion with senseless laughter,
or with alarming screams. Reading she was no longer story. And her
glass--as well as her husband--told her that equal to; after a few pages
she lost her understanding of a she suffered daily in her appearance.
Her hair was falling; she one day told the servant that she would soon
have to buy a wig. Poor Alice! And she had not even the resource of
railing against the social state. What a pity she had never studied that
subject!

So the time went on till February of the new year. Alice’s release was
at hand.


