


His search being vain, Mutimer hastened from one police-station to
another, leaving descriptions of his sister at each. When he came
home again Adela had just arrived. She was suffering too much from the
reaction which followed upon her excitement to give him more than the
briefest account of what she had heard and said; but Mutimer cared
little for details. He drew an easy-chair near to the fire and begged
her to rest. As she lay back for a moment with closed eyes, he took her
faint hand and put it to his lips. He had never done so before; when she
glanced at him he averted his face in embarrassment.

He would have persuaded her to go to bed, but she declared that sleep
was impossible; she had much rather sit up with him till news came of
Alice, as it surely must do in course of the night. For Mutimer there
was no resting; he circled continually about the neighbouring streets,
returning to the house every quarter of an hour, always to find Adela in
the same position. Her heart would not fall to its normal beat, and the
vision of those harsh faces would not pass from her mind.

At two o’clock they heard that Alice was found. She had been discovered
several miles from home, lying unconscious in the street, and was now
in a hospital. Mutimer set off at once; he returned with the report that
she was between life and death. It was impossible to remove her.

Adela slept a little between six and eight; her husband took even
shorter rest. When she came down to the sitting-room, he was reading the
morning paper. As she entered he uttered a cry of astonishment and rage.

‘Look here!’ he exclaimed to her. ‘Read that!’

He pointed to an account of the Irish Dairy Company frauds, in which it
was stated that the secretary, known as Delancey, appeared also to have
borne the name of Rodman.

They gazed at each other.

‘Then it was Rodman wrote that letter!’ Mutimer cried. ‘I’ll swear to
it. He did it to injure me at the last moment. Why haven’t they got him
yet? The police are useless. But they’ve got Hilary, I see--yes, they’ve
got Hilary. He was caught at Dover. Ha, ha! He denies everything--says
he didn’t even know of the secretary’s decamping. The lying scoundrel!
Says he was going to Paris on private business. But they’ve got him! And
see here again: “The same Rodman is at present wanted by the police on a
charge of bigamy.” Wanted! If they weren’t incompetent fools they’d have
had him already. Ten to one he’s out of England.’

It was a day of tumult for Mutimer. At the hospital he found no
encouragement, but he could only leave Alice in the hands of the
doctors. From the hospital he went to his mother’s house; he had not
yet had time to let her know of anything. But his main business lay in
Clerkenwell and in various parts of the East End, wherever he could see
his fellow-agitators. In hot haste he wrote an announcement of a meeting
on Clerkenwell Green for Sunday afternoon, and had thousands of copies
printed on slips; by evening these were scattered throughout his
‘parishes.’ He found that the calumny affecting him was already widely
known; several members of his committee met him with black looks. Here
and there an ironical question was put to him about his sister’s health.
With the knowledge that Alice might be dying or dead, he could scarcely
find words of reply. His mood changed from fear and indignation to
a grim fury; within a few hours he made many resolute enemies by his
reckless vehemence and vituperation.

The evening papers brought him a piece of intelligence which would have
rejoiced him but for something with which it was coupled. Delancey,
_alias_ Rodman, _alias_ Williamson, was arrested; he had been caught in
Hamburg. The telegram added that he talked freely and had implicated
a number of persons--among them a certain Socialist agitator, name not
given. As Mutimer read this he fell for a moment into blank despair. He
returned at once to Holloway, all but resolved to throw up the game--to
abandon the effort to defend himself, and wait for what might result
from the judicial investigations. Adela resisted this to the uttermost.
She understood that such appearance of fear would be fatal to him. With
a knowledge of Demos which owed much to her last night’s experience, she
urged to him that behind his back calumny would thrive unchecked, would
grow in a day to proportions altogether irresistible. She succeeded in
restoring his courage, though at the same time there revived in Mutimer
the savage spirit which could only result in harm to himself.

‘This is how they repay a man who works for them!’ he cried repeatedly.
‘The ungrateful brutes! Let me once clear myself, and I’ll throw it up,
bid them find someone else to fight their battles for them. It’s always
been the same: history shows it What have I got for myself out of it
all, I’d like to know? Haven’t I given them every penny I had? Let them
do their worst! Let them bark and bray till they are hoarse!’

He would have kept away from Clerkenwell that evening, but even this
Adela would not let him do. She insisted that he must be seen and heard,
that the force of innocence would prevail even with his enemies. The
couple of hours he passed with her were spent in ceaseless encouragement
on her side, in violent tirades on his. He paced the room like a caged
lion, at one moment execrating Rodman, the next railing against the
mob to whose interests he had devoted himself. Now and then his voice
softened, and he spoke of Alice.

‘The scoundrel set even her against me! If she lives, perhaps she’ll
believe I’m guilty; how can my word stand against her husband’s? Why, he
isn’t her husband at all! It’s a good thing if she dies--the best thing
that could happen. What will become of her? What are we to call her?
She’s neither married nor single. Can we keep it from her, do you think?
No, that won’t do; she must be free to marry an honest man. You’ll try
and make friends with her, Adela--if ever you’ve the chance? She’ll
have to live with us, of course unless she’d rather live with mother. We
mustn’t tell her for a long time, till she’s strong enough to bear it.’

He with difficulty ate a few mouthfuls and went off to Clerkenwell.
In the erstwhile dancing-saloon it was a night of tempest. Mutimer
had never before addressed an unfriendly audience. After the first few
interruptions he lost his temper, and with it his cause, as far as
these present hearers were concerned. When he left them, it was amid
the mutterings of a storm which was not quite--only not quite--ready to
burst in fury.

‘Who knows you won’t take yer ‘ook before to-morrow?’ cried a voice as
he neared the door.

‘Wait and see!’ Mutimer shouted in reply, with a savage laugh. ‘I’ve a
word or two to say yet to blackguards like you.’

He could count on some twenty pairs of fists in the room, if it came to
that point; but he was allowed to depart unmolested.

On the way home he called at the hospital. There was no change in
Alice’s condition.

The next day he remained at home till it was time to start for
Clerkenwell Green. He was all but worn out, and there was nothing of any
use to be done before the meeting assembled. Adela went for him to the
hospital and brought back still the same report. He ate fairly well of
his midday dinner, seeming somewhat calmer. Adela, foreseeing his main
danger, begged him to address the people without anger, assured him that
a dignified self-possession would go much farther than any amount of
blustering. He was induced to promise that he would follow her advice.

He purposed walking to the Green; the exercise would perhaps keep his
nerves in order. When it was time to start, he took Adela’s hand, and
for a second time kissed it. She made an effort over herself and
held her lips to him. The ‘good-bye’ was exchanged, with a word of
strengthening from Adela; but still he did not go. He was endeavouring
to speak.

‘I don’t think I’ve thanked you half enough,’ he said at length, ‘for
what you did on Friday night.’

‘Yes, more than enough,’ was the reply.

‘You make little of it, but it’s a thing very few women would have done.
And it was hard for you, because you’re a lady.’

‘No less a woman,’ murmured Adela, her head bowed.

‘And a good woman--I believe with all my heart. I want to ask you to
forgive me--for things I once said to you. I was a brute. Perhaps if I
had been brought up in the same kind of way that you were--that’s the
difference between us, you see. But try if you can to forget it. I’ll
never think anything but good of you as long as I live.’

She could not reply, for a great sob was choking her. She pressed his
band; the tears broke from her eyes as she turned away.

It being Sunday afternoon, visitors were admitted to the hospital in
which Alice lay. Mutimer had allowed himself time to pass five minutes
by his sister’s bedside on the way to Clerkenwell. Alice was still
unconscious; she lay motionless, but her lips muttered unintelligible
words. He bent over her and spoke, but she did not regard him. It was
perhaps the keenest pain Mutimer had ever known to look into those eyes
and meet no answering intelligence. By close listening he believed he
heard her utter the name of her husband. It was useless to stay; he
kissed her and left the ward.

On his arrival at Clerkenwell Green--a large triangular space which
merits the name of Green as much as the Strand--he found a considerable
gathering already assembled about the cart from which he was to speak.
The inner circle consisted of his friends--some fifty who remained
staunch in their faith. Prominent among them was the man Redgrave, he
who had presented the address when Mutimer took leave of his New Wanley
workpeople. He had come to London at the same time as his leader,
and had done much to recommend Mutimer’s scheme in the East End. His
muscular height made those about him look puny. He was red in the face
with the excitement of abusing Mutimer’s enemies, and looked as if
nothing would please him better than to second words with arguments more
cogent. He and those about him hailed the agitator’s appearance with
three ringing cheers. A little later came a supporter whom Richard had
not expected to see--Mr. Westlake. Only this morning intelligence of
what was going on had reached his ears. At once he had scouted the
accusations as incredible; he deemed it a duty to present himself on
Mutimer’s side. Outside this small cluster was an indefinable mob, a
portion of it bitterly hostile, a part indifferent; among the latter
a large element of mere drifting blackguardism, the raff of a city,
anticipating with pleasure an uproar which would give them unwonted
opportunities of violence and pillage. These gentle men would with equal
zeal declare for Mutimer or his opponents, as the fortune of the day
directed them.

The core of the hostile party consisted of those who followed the banner
of Comrade Roodhouse, the ralliers to the ‘Tocsin.’ For them it was a
great occasion. The previous evening had seen a clamorous assembly in
the room behind the Hoxton coffee-shop. Comrade Roodhouse professed to
have full details of the scandal which had just come to light. According
to him, there was no doubt whatever that Mutimer had known from the
first the character of the bogus Company, and had wittingly used the
money of the East-Enders to aid in floating a concern which would
benefit himself and a few others. Roodhouse disclosed the identity of
Mr. Robert Delancey, and explained the relations existing between Rodman
and Mutimer, ignoring the fact that a lawsuit had of late turned their
friendship to mutual animosity. It was an opportunity not to be missed
for paying back the hard things Mutimer had constantly said of the
‘Tocsin’ party. Comrade Roodhouse was busy in the crowd, sowing
calumnies and fermenting wrath. In the crowd were our old acquaintances
Messrs. Cowes and Cullen, each haranguing as many as could be got
to form a circle and listen, indulging themselves in measureless
vituperation, crying shame on traitors to the noble cause. Here, too,
was Daniel Dabbs, mainly interested in the occasion as an admirable
provocative of thirst. He was much disposed to believe Mutimer guilty,
but understood that it was none of his business to openly take part
with either side. He stood well on the limits of the throng; it was not
impossible that the debate might end in the cracking of crowns, in
which case Mr. Dabbs, as a respectable licensed victualler whose weekly
profits had long since made him smile at the follies of his youth, would
certainly incur no needless risk to his own valuable scalp.

The throng thickened; it was impossible that the speakers should be
audible to the whole assembly. Hastily it was decided to arrange two
centres. Whilst Mutimer was speaking at the lower end of the Green,
Redgrave would lift up his voice in the opposite part, and make it
understood that Mutimer would repeat his address there as soon as he
had satisfied the hearers below. The meeting was announced for three
o’clock, but it was half an hour later before Mutimer stood up on the
cart and extended his hand in appeal for silence. It at first seemed as
if he could not succeed in making his voice heard at all. A cluster
of Roodhouse’s followers, under the pretence of demanding quiet, made
incessant tumult. But ultimately the majority, those who were merely
curious, and such of the angry East-Enders as really wanted to hear
what Mutimer had to say for himself, imposed silence. Richard began his
speech.

He had kept Adela’s warning in mind, and determined to be calmly
dignified in his refutal of the charges brought against him. For five
minutes he impressed his hearers. He had never spoken better. In the
beginning he briefly referred to the facts of his life, spoke of the use
he had made of wealth when he possessed it, demanded if it was likely
that he should join with swindlers to rob the very class to which he
himself was proud to belong, and for which he had toiled unceasingly.
He spoke of Rodman, and denied that he had ever known of this man’s
connection with the Company--a man who was his worst enemy. He it was,
this Rodman, who doubtless had written the letter which first directed
suspicion in the wrong quarter; it was an act such as Rodman would be
capable of, for the sake of gratifying his enmity. And how had that
enmity arisen? He told the story of the lawsuit; showed how, in that
matter, he had stood up for common honesty, though at the time Rodman
was his friend. Then he passed to the subject of his stewardship.
Why had he put that trust money into a concern without sufficient
investigation? He could make but one straightforward answer: he had
believed that the Company was sound, and he bought shares because the
dividends promised to be large, and it was his first desire to do the
very best he could for those who had laid their hard-earned savings in
his hands.

For some minutes he had had increasing difficulty in holding his voice
above the noise of interruptions, hostile or friendly. It now became
impossible for him to proceed. A man who was lifted on to the shoulders
of two others began to make a counter-speech, roaring so that those
around could not but attend to him. He declared himself one of those
whom Mutimer had robbed; all his savings for seven months were gone; he
was now out of work, and his family would soon be starving. Richard’s
blood boiled as he heard these words.

‘You lie!’ he bellowed in return; ‘I know you. You are the fellow who
said last night that I should run away, and never come at all to this
meeting. I called you a blackguard then, and I call you a liar now. You
have put in my hand six threepences, and no more. The money you might
have saved you constantly got drunk upon. Your money is waiting for you:
you have only to come and apply for it. And I say the same to all
the rest. I am ready to pay all the money back, and pay it too with
interest.’

‘Of course you are!’ vociferated the other. ‘You can’t steal it, so you
offer to give it back. We know that game.’

It was the commencement of utter confusion. A hundred voices were trying
to make themselves heard. The great crowd swayed this way and that.
Mutimer looked on a tempest of savage faces--a sight which might have
daunted any man in his position. Fists were shaken at him, curses were
roared at him from every direction. It was clear that the feeling of
the mob was hopelessly against him; his explanations were ridiculed. A
second man was reared on others’ shoulders; but instead of speaking from
the place where he was, he demanded to be borne forward and helped to
a standing on the cart. This was effected after a brief struggle with
Mutimer’s supporters. Then all at once there was a cessation of the
hubbub that the new speaker might be heard.

‘Look at this man!’ he cried, pointing at Mutimer, who had drawn as far
aside as the cart would let him. ‘He’s been a-tellin’ you what he did
when somebody died an’ left him a fortune. There’s just one thing he’s
forgot, an’ shall I tell you what that is? When he was a workin’ man
like ourselves, mates, he was a-goin’ to marry a pore girl, a workin’
girl. When he gets his money, what does he do? Why, he pitches her
over, if you please, an’ marries a fine lady, as took him because he
was rich--that’s the way _ladies_ always chooses their husbands,
y’understand.’

He was interrupted by a terrific yell, but by dint of vigorous pantomime
secured a hearing again.

‘But wait a bit, maties; I haven’t done yet. He pitches over the pore
girl, but he does worse afterwards. He sets a tale a-goin’ as she’d
disgraced herself, as she wasn’t fit to be a honest man’s wife. An’ it
was all a damned lie, as lots of us knows. Now what d’ye think o’ that!
This is a friend o’ the People, this is! This is the man as ‘as your
interests at ‘art, mates! If he’ll do a thing like that, won’t he rob
you of your savin’s?’

As soon as he knew what the man was about to speak of, Mutimer felt
the blood rush back upon his heart. It was as when a criminal hears
delivered against him a damning item of evidence. He knew that he was
pale, that every feature declared his consciousness of guilt. In vain he
tried to face the mob and smile contemptuously. His eyes fell; he stood
without the power of speech.

The yell was repeated, and prolonged, owing to another cause than the
accusation just heard. When the accuser was borne forwards to the cart,
a rumour spread among those more remote that an attack was being made on
Mutimer and his friends. The rumour reached that part of the Green where
Redgrave was then haranguing. At once the listeners faced about in the
direction of the supposed conflict. Redgrave himself leaped down, and
called upon all supporters of Mutimer to follow him. It was the crash
between two crowds which led to the prolonging of the yell.

The meeting was over, the riot had begun.

Picture them, the indignant champions of honesty, the avengers of virtue
defamed! Demos was roused, was tired of listening to mere articulate
speech; it was time for a good wild-beast roar, for a taste of
bloodshed. Scarcely a face in all the mob but distorted itself to
express as much savagery as can be got out of the human countenance.
Mutimer, seeing what had come, sprang down from the cart. He was at once
carried yards away in an irresistible rush. Impossible for him and
his friends to endeavour to hold their ground: they were too vastly
outnumbered; the most they could do was to hold together and use every
opportunity of retreat, standing in the meanwhile on the defensive.
There was no adequate body of police on the Green; the riot would take
its course unimpeded by the hired servants of the capitalist State.
Redgrave little by little fought his way to within sight of Mutimer; he
brought with him a small but determined contingent. On all sides was the
thud of blows, the indignant shouting of the few who desired to preserve
order mingled with the clamour of those who combated. Demos was having
his way; civilisation was blotted out, and club law proclaimed.

Mutimer lost his hat in jumping from the cart; in five minutes his
waistcoat and shirt were rent open, whether by friends in guarding him,
or by foes in assailing, it was impossible to say. But his bodyguard
held together with wonderful firmness, only now and then an enemy got
near enough to dash a fist in his face. If he fell into the hands of the
mob he was done for; Mutimer knew that, and was ready to fight for his
life. But the direction taken by the main current of the crowd favoured
him. In about twenty minutes he was swept away from the Green, and into
a street. There were now fewer foes about him; he saw an opportunity,
and together with Redgrave burst away. There was no shame in taking to
flight where the odds against him were so overwhelming. But pursuers
were close behind him; their cry gave a lead to the chase. He looked for
some by-way as he rushed along the pavement. But an unexpected refuge
offered itself. He was passing a little group of women, when a voice
from among them cried loudly--‘In here! In here!’ He saw that a
house-door was open, saw a hand beckon wildly, and at once sprang for
the retreat. A woman entered immediately behind him and slammed the
door, but he did not see that a stick which the foremost of his pursuers
had flung at him came with a terrible blow full upon his preserver’s
face.

For a moment he could only lean against the wall of the passage,
recovering his breath. Where he stood it was almost dark, for the
evening was drawing in. The woman who had rescued him was standing near,
but he could not distinguish her face. He heard the mob assembling in
the narrow street, their shouts, their trampling, and speedily there
began a great noise at the door. A beating with sticks and fists, a
thundering at the knocker.

‘Are you the landlady?’ Mutimer asked, turning to his silent companion.

‘No,’ was the reply. ‘She is outside, I must put up the chain. They
might get her latchkey from her.’

At the first syllable he started; the voice was so familiar to him. The
words were spoken with an entire absence of womanish consternation; the
voice trembled a little, but for all that there was calm courage in its
sound. When she had made the door secure and turned again towards him,
he looked into her face as closely as he could.

‘Is it Emma?’

‘Yes.’

Both were silent. Mutimer forgot all about his danger; that at this
moment he should meet Emma Vine, that it should be she who saved him,
impressed him with awe which was stronger than all the multitude of
sensations just now battling within him. For it was her name that had
roused the rabble finally against him. For his wrong to her he knew that
he would have suffered justly; yet her hand it was that barred the door
against his brutal pursuers. A sudden weakness shook his limbs; he had
again to lean upon the wall for support, and, scarcely conscious of what
he did, he sobbed three or four times.

‘Are you hurt?’ Emma asked.

‘No, I’m not hurt, no.’

Two children had come down the stairs, and were clinging to Emma, crying
with fright. For the noise at the door was growing terrific.

‘Who is there in the house?’ Mutimer asked.

‘No one, I think. The landlady and two other women who live here are
outside. My sister is away somewhere.’

‘Can I get off by the back?’

‘No. There’s a little yard, but the walls are far too high.’

‘They’ll break the door through. If they do, the devils are as likely to
kill you as me. I must go upstairs to a window and speak to them. I may
do something yet. Sooner than put you in danger I’ll go out and let them
do their worst Listen to them! That’s the People, that is! I deserve
killing, fool that I am, if only for the lying good I’ve said of them.
Let me go up into your room, if it has a window in the front.’

He led up the stairs, and Emma showed him the door of her room--the same
in which she had received the visit of Daniel Dabbs. He looked about it,
saw the poverty of it. Then he looked at Emma.

‘Good God! Who has hit you?’

There was a great cut on her cheek, the blood was running down upon her
dress.

‘Somebody threw a stick,’ she answered, trying to smile. ‘I don’t feel
it; I’ll tie a handkerchief on it.’

Again a fit of sobbing seized him; he felt as weak as a child.

‘The cowardly roughs! Give me the handkerchief--I’ll tie it. Emma!’

‘Think of your own safety,’ she replied hurriedly. ‘I tell you I don’t
feel any pain. Do you think you can get them to listen to you?’

‘I’ll try. There’s nothing else for it. You stand at the back of the
room; they may throw something at me.’

‘Oh, then, don’t open the window! They can’t break the door. Some help
will come.’

‘They _will_ break the door. You’d be as safe among wild beasts as among
those fellows if they get into the house.’

He threw up the sash, though Emma would not go from his side. In the
street below was a multitude which made but one ravening monster; all
its eyes were directed to the upper storeys of this house. Mutimer
looked to the right and to the left. In the latter quarter he saw the
signs of a struggle Straining his eyes through the dusk, he perceived
a mounted police-officer forcing his way through the throng; on either
side were visible the helmets of constables. He drew a deep sigh of
relief, for the efforts of the mob against the house door could scarcely
succeed unless they used more formidable weapons for assault, and that
would now be all but impossible.

He drew his bead back into the room and looked at Emma with a laugh of
satisfaction.

‘The police are making way! There’s nothing to fear now.’

‘Come away from the window, then,’ Emma urged. ‘It is useless to show
yourself.’

‘Let them see me, the blackguards! They’re so tight packed they haven’t
a band among them to aim anything.’

As he spoke, he again leaned forward from the window-sill, and stretched
his arms towards the approaching rescuers. That same instant a heavy
fragment of stone, hurled with deadly force and precision, struck him
upon the temple. The violence of the blow flung him back into the room;
he dropped to his knees, threw out a hand as if to save himself, then
sank face foremost upon the floor. Not a sound had escaped his lips.

Emma, with a low cry of horror, bent to him and put her arm about his
body. Raising his head, she saw that, though his eyes were staring, they
had no power of sight; on his lips were flecks of blood. She laid her
cheeks to his lips, but could discern no breath; she tore apart the
clothing from his breast, but her hand could not find his heart. Then
she rushed for a pillow, placed it beneath his head, and began to bathe
his face. Not all the great love which leaped like flame in her bosom
could call the dead to life.

The yells which had greeted Mutimer’s appearance at the window were
followed by a steady roar, mingled with scornful laughter at his speedy
retreat; only a few saw or suspected that he had been gravely hit by the
missile. Then the tumult began to change its character; attention was
drawn from the house to the advancing police, behind whom came a band
of Mutimer’s adherents, led by Redgrave. The latter were cheering; the
hostile rabble met their cheers with defiant challenges. The police
had now almost more than they could do to prevent a furious collision
between the two bodies; but their numbers kept increasing, as
detachments arrived one after another, and at length the house itself
was firmly guarded, whilst the rioters on both sides were being put to
flight. It was not a long street; the police cleared it completely and
allowed no one to enter at either end.

It was all but dark when at length the door of Emma’s room was opened
and six or seven women appeared, searching for Mutimer. The landlady was
foremost; she carried a lamp. It showed the dead man at full length on
the floor, and Emma kneeling beside him, holding his hand. Near her
were the two children, crying miserably. Emma appeared to have lost her
voice; when the light flashed upon her eyes she covered them with one
hand, with the other pointed downwards. The women broke into cries
of fright and lamentation. They clustered around the prostrate form,
examined it, demanded explanations. One at length sped down to the
street and shortly returned with two policemen. A messenger was
despatched for a doctor.

Emma did not move; she was not weeping, but paid no attention to any
words addressed to her. The room was thronged with curious neighbours,
there was a hubbub of talk. When at length the medical man arrived, he
cleared the chamber of all except Emma. After a brief examination of the
body he said to her:

‘You are his wife?’

She, still kneeling, looked up into his face with pained astonishment.

‘His wife? Oh no! I am a stranger.’

The doctor showed surprise.

‘He was killed in your presence?’

‘He is dead--really dead?’ she asked under her breath. And, as she
spoke, she laid her hand upon his arm.

‘He must have been killed instantaneously. Did the stone fall in the
room? Was it a stone?’

No one had searched for the missile. The doctor discovered it not far
away. Whilst he was weighing it in his hand there came a knock at the
door. It was Mr. Westlake who entered. He came and looked at the dead
man, then, introducing himself, spoke a few words with the doctor.
Assured that there was no shadow of hope, he withdrew, having looked
closely at Emma, who now stood a little apart, her hands held together
before her.

The doctor departed a few moments later. He had examined the wound on
the girl’s face, and found that it was not serious. As he was going,
Emma said to him:

‘Will you tell them to keep away--all the people in the house?’

‘This is your own room?’

‘I live here with my sister.’

‘I will ask them to respect your wish. The body must stay here for the
present, though.’

‘Oh yes, yes, I know.’

‘Is your sister at home?’

‘She will be soon. Please tell them not to come here.’

She was alone again with the dead. It cost her great efforts of mind to
convince herself that Mutimer really had breathed his last; it seemed to
her but a moment since she heard him speak, heard him laugh; was not a
trace of the laugh even now discernible on his countenance? How was it
possible for life to vanish in this way? She constantly touched him,
spoke to him. It was incredible that he should not be able to hear her.

Her love for him was immeasurable. Bitterness she had long since
overcome, and she had thought that love, too, was gone with it. She had
deceived herself. Her heart, incredible as it may seem, had even known
a kind of hope--how else could she have borne the life which fate laid
upon her?--the hope that is one with love, that asks nothing of the
reason, nor yields to reason’s contumely. He had been smitten dead at
the moment that she loved him dearest.

Her sister Kate came in. She had been spending the day with friends in
another part of London. When just within the door she stopped and looked
at the body nervously.

‘Emma!’ she said. ‘Why don’t you come downstairs? Mrs. Lake’ll let us
have her back room, and tea’s waiting for you. I wonder how you _can_
stay here.’

‘I can’t come. I want to be alone, Kate. Tell them not to come up.’

‘But you can’t stay here all night, child!’

‘I can’t talk. I want to be alone. Perhaps I’ll come down before long.’

Kate withdrew and went to gossip with the people who were incessantly
coming and going in the lower part of the house. The opening and
shutting of the front door, the sound of voices, the hurrying feet upon
the staircase, were audible enough to Emma. She heard, too, the crowds
that kept passing along the street, their shouts, their laughter, the
voices of the policemen bidding them move on. It was all a nightmare,
from which she strove to awake.

At length she was able to weep. Gazing constantly at the dead face,
she linked it at last with some far-off memory of tenderness, and that
brought her tears. She held the cold hand against her heart and eased
herself with passionate sobbing, with low wails, with loving utterance
of his name. Thus it happened that she did not hear when someone knocked
lightly at the door and entered. A shadow across the still features
told her of another’s presence. Starting back, she saw a lady from whose
pale, beautiful face a veil had just been raised. The stranger, who was
regarding her with tenderly compassionate eyes, said:

‘I am Mrs. Mutimer.’

Emma rose to her feet and drew a little apart. Her face fell.

‘They told me downstairs,’ Adela pursued, ‘that I should find Miss Vine
in the room. Is your name Emma Vine?’

Emma asked herself whether this lady, his wife, could know anything
of her story. It seemed so, from the tone of the question. She only
replied:

‘Yes, it is.’

Then she again ventured to look up at the woman whose beauty had made
her life barren. There were no signs of tears on Adela’s face; to Emma
she seemed cold, though so grave and gentle. Adela gazed for a while
at the dead man. She, too, felt as though it were all a dream. The
spectacle of Emma’s passionate grief had kept her emotion within her
heart, perhaps had weakened it.

‘You have yourself been hurt,’ she said, turning again to the other.

Emma only shook her head. She suffered terribly from Adela’s presence.

‘I will go,’ she said in a whisper.

‘This is your room, I think?’

‘Yes.’

‘May I stay here?’

‘Of course--you must.’

Emma was moving towards the door.

‘You wish to go?’ Adela said, uttering the words involuntarily.

‘Yes, I must.’

Adela, left alone, stood gazing at the dead face. She did not kneel by
her husband, as Emma had done, but a terrible anguish came upon her as
she gazed; she buried her face in her hands. Her feeling was more of
horror at the crime that had been committed than of individual grief.
Yet grief she knew. The last words her husband had spoken to her were
good and worthy; in her memory they overcame all else. That parting when
he left home had seemed to her like the beginning of a new life for him.
Could not his faults be atoned for otherwise than by this ghastly end?
She had no need to direct her thoughts to the good that was in him. Even
as she had taken his part against his traducers, so she now was
stirred in spirit against his murderers. She felt a solemn gladness in
remembering that she had stood before that meeting in the Clerkenwell
room and served him as far as it was in a woman’s power to do. All
her long sufferings were forgotten; this supreme calamity of death
outweighed them all. His enemies had murdered him; would they not
continue to assail his name? She resolved that his memory should be
her care. That had nothing to do with love; simple justice demanded it.
Justice and gratitude for the last words he had spoken to her.

She had as yet scarcely noticed the room in which she was. At length
she surveyed it; its poverty brought tears in her eyes. There had been a
fire, but the last spark was dead. She began to feel cold.

Soon there was the sound of someone ascending the stairs, and Emma,
after knocking, again entered. She carried a tray with tea-things, which
she placed upon the table. Then, having glanced at the fireplace, she
took from a cupboard wood and paper and was beginning to make a fire
when Adela stopped her, saying:

‘You must not do that for me. I will light the fire myself, if you will
let me.’

Emma looked up in surprise.

‘It is kind of you to bring me the tea,’ Adela continued. ‘But let me do
the rest.’

‘If you wish to--yes,’ the other replied, without understanding the
thought which prompted Adela. She carefully held herself from glancing
towards the dead man, and moved away.

Adela approached her.

‘Have you a room for the night?’

‘Yes, thank you.’

‘Will you--will you take my hand before you leave me?’ She held it
forth; Emma, with eyes turned to the ground, gave her own.

‘Look at me,’ Adela said, under her breath.

Their eyes met, and at last Emma understood. In that grave, noble gaze
was far more than sympathy and tenderness; it was a look that besought
pardon.

‘May I come to you in the night to see if you need anything?’ Emma
asked.

‘I shall need nothing. Come only if you can’t sleep.’

Adela lit the fire and began her night’s watching.


