

The next day, or rather the next evening, Sir Miles St. John was seated
before his unshared chicken,--seated alone, and vaguely surprised at
himself, in a large, comfortable room in his old hotel, Hanover Square.
Yes, he had escaped. Hast thou, O Reader, tasted the luxury of escape
from a home where the charm is broken,--where Distrust looks askant from
the Lares? In vain had Dalibard remonstrated, conjured up dangers, and
asked at least to accompany him. Excepting his dogs and his old valet,
who was too like a dog in his fond fidelity to rank amongst bipeds, Sir
Miles did not wish to have about him a single face familiar at Laughton,
Dalibard especially. Lucretia’s letter had hinted at plans and designs
in Dalibard. It might be unjust, it might be ungrateful; but he grew
sick at the thought that he was the centre-stone of stratagems and
plots. The smooth face of the Provencal took a wily expression in his
eyes; nay, he thought his very footmen watched his steps as if to count
how long before they followed his bier. So, breaking from all roughly,
with a shake of his head and a laconic assertion of business in
London, he got into his carriage,--his own old bachelor’s lumbering
travelling-carriage,--and bade the post-boys drive fast, fast! Then,
when he felt alone,--quite alone,--and the gates of the lodge swung
behind him, he rubbed his hands with a schoolboy’s glee, and chuckled
aloud, as if he enjoyed, not only the sense, but the fun of his safety;
as if he had done something prodigiously cunning and clever.

So when he saw himself snug in his old, well-remembered hotel, in the
same room as of yore, when returned, brisk and gay, from the breezes of
Weymouth or the brouillards of Paris, he thought he shook hands again
with his youth. Age and lameness, apoplexy and treason, all were
forgotten for the moment. And when, as the excitement died, those grim
spectres came back again to his thoughts, they found their victim braced
and prepared, standing erect on that hearth for whose hospitality he
paid his guinea a day,--his front proud and defying. He felt yet that
he had fortune and power, that a movement of his hand could raise and
strike down, that at the verge of the tomb he was armed, to punish or
reward, with the balance and the sword. Tripped in the smug waiter, and
announced “Mr. Parchmount.”

“Set a chair, and show him in.” The lawyer entered.

“My dear Sir Miles, this is indeed a surprise! What has brought you to
town?”

“The common whim of the old, sir. I would alter my will.”

Three days did lawyer and client devote to the task; for Sir Miles was
minute, and Mr. Parchmount was precise, and little difficulties arose,
and changes in the first outline were made, and Sir Miles, from the very
depth of his disgust, desired not to act only from passion. In that last
deed of his life, the old man was sublime. He sought to rise out of
the mortal, fix his eyes on the Great Judge, weigh circumstances and
excuses, and keep justice even and serene.

Meanwhile, unconscious of the train laid afar, Lucretia reposed on
the mine,--reposed, indeed, is not the word; for she was agitated and
restless that Mainwaring had not obeyed her summons. She wrote to him
again from Southampton the third day of her arrival; but before his
answer came she received this short epistle from London:--

“Mr. Parchmount presents his compliments to Miss Clavering, and, by
desire of Sir Miles St. John, requests her not to return to Laughton.
Miss Clavering will hear further in a few days, when Sir Miles has
concluded the business that has brought him to London.”

This letter, if it excited much curiosity, did not produce alarm. It
was natural that Sir Miles should be busy in winding up his affairs; his
journey to London for that purpose was no ill omen to her prospects,
and her thoughts flew back to the one subject that tyrannized over them.
Mainwaring’s reply, which came two days afterwards, disquieted her much
more. He had not found the letter she had left for him in the tree. He
was full of apprehensions; he condemned the imprudence of calling on her
at Mr. Fielden’s; he begged her to renounce the idea of such a risk.
He would return again to Guy’s Oak and search more narrowly: had she
changed the spot where the former letters were placed? Yet now, not even
the non-receipt of her letter, which she ascribed to the care with which
she had concealed it amidst the dry leaves and moss, disturbed her
so much as the evident constraint with which Mainwaring wrote,--the
cautious and lukewarm remonstrance which answered her passionate appeal.
It may be that her very doubts, at times, of Mainwaring’s affection
had increased the ardour of her own attachment; for in some natures the
excitement of fear deepens love more than the calmness of trust. Now
with the doubt for the first time flashed the resentment, and her
answer to Mainwaring was vehement and imperious. But the next day came
a messenger express from London, with a letter from Mr. Parchmount that
arrested for the moment even the fierce current of love.

When the task had been completed,--the will signed, sealed, and
delivered,--the old man had felt a load lifted from his heart. Three or
four of his old friends, bons vivants like himself, had seen his arrival
duly proclaimed in the newspapers, and had hastened to welcome him.
Warmed by the genial sight of faces associated with the frank joys
of his youth, Sir Miles, if he did not forget the prudent counsels of
Dalibard, conceived a proud bitterness of joy in despising them. Why
take such care of the worn-out carcass? His will was made. What was
left to life so peculiarly attractive? He invited his friends to a feast
worthy of old. Seasoned revellers were they, with a free gout for a vent
to all indulgence. So they came; and they drank, and they laughed, and
they talked back their young days. They saw not the nervous irritation,
the strain on the spirits, the heated membrane of the brain, which made
Sir Miles the most jovial of all. It was a night of nights; the old
fellows were lifted back into their chariots or sedans. Sir Miles
alone seemed as steady and sober as if he had supped with Diogenes. His
servant, whose respectful admonitions had been awed into silence, lent
him his arm to bed, but Sir Miles scarcely touched it. The next morning,
when the servant (who slept in the same room) awoke, to his surprise
the glare of a candle streamed on his eyes. He rubbed them: could he
see right? Sir Miles was seated at the table; he must have got up and
lighted a candle to write,--noiselessly, indeed. The servant looked and
looked, and the stillness of Sir Miles awed him: he was seated on an
armchair, leaning back. As awe succeeded to suspicion, he sprang up,
approached his master, took his hand: it was cold, and fell heavily from
his clasp. Sir Miles must have been dead for hours.

The pen lay on the ground, where it had dropped from the hand; the
letter on the table was scarcely commenced: the words ran thus,--

“LUCRETIA,--You will return no more to my house. You are free as if I
were dead; but I shall be just. Would that I had been so to your mother,
to your sister! But I am old now, as you say, and--”

To one who could have seen into that poor proud heart at the moment
the hand paused forever, what remained unwritten would have been clear.
There was, first, the sharp struggle to conquer loathing repugnance, and
address at all the false and degraded one; then came the sharp sting of
ingratitude; then the idea of the life grudged and the grave desired;
then the stout victory over scorn, the resolution to be just; then the
reproach of the conscience that for so far less an offence the sister
had been thrown aside, the comfort, perhaps, found in her gentle and
neglected child obstinately repelled; then the conviction of all earthly
vanity and nothingness,--the look on into life, with the chilling
sentiment that affection was gone, that he could never trust again,
that he was too old to open his arms to new ties; and then, before felt
singly, all these thoughts united, and snapped the cord.

In announcing his mournful intelligence, with more feeling than might
have been expected from a lawyer (but even his lawyer loved Sir Miles),
Mr. Parchmount observed that “as the deceased lay at a hotel, and as
Miss Clavering’s presence would not be needed in the performance of
the last rites, she would probably forbear the journey to town.
Nevertheless, as it was Sir Miles’s wish that the will should be opened
as soon as possible after his death, and it would doubtless contain
instructions as to his funeral, it would be well that Miss Clavering and
her sister should immediately depute some one to attend the reading
of the testament on their behalf. Perhaps Mr. Fielden would kindly
undertake that melancholy office.”

To do justice to Lucretia, it must be said that her first emotions,
on the receipt of this letter, were those of a poignant and remorseful
grief, for which she was unprepared. But how different it is to count
on what shall follow death, and to know that death has come! Susan’s
sobbing sympathy availed not, nor Mr. Fielden’s pious and tearful
exhortations; her own sinful thoughts and hopes came back to her,
haunting and stern as furies. She insisted at first upon going to
London, gazing once more on the clay,--nay, the carriage was at the
door, for all yielded to her vehemence; but then her heart misgave her:
she did not dare to face the dead. Conscience waved her back from the
solemn offices of nature; she hid her face with her hands, shrank again
into her room; and Mr. Fielden, assuming unbidden the responsibility,
went alone.

Only Vernon (summoned from Brighton), the good clergyman, and the
lawyer, to whom, as sole executor, the will was addressed, and in whose
custody it had been left, were present when the seal of the testament
was broken. The will was long, as is common when the dust that it
disposes of covers some fourteen or fifteen thousand acres. But out of
the mass of technicalities and repetitions these points of interest rose
salient: To Charles Vernon, of Vernon Grange, Esq., and his heirs by
him lawfully begotten, were left all the lands and woods and manors
that covered that space in the Hampshire map known by the name of the
“Laughton property,” on condition that he and his heirs assumed the
name and arms of St. John; and on the failure of Mr. Vernon’s issue, the
estate passed, first (with the same conditions) to the issue of Susan
Mivers; next to that of Lucretia Clavering. There the entail ceased; and
the contingency fell to the rival ingenuity of lawyers in hunting out,
amongst the remote and forgotten descendants of some ancient St. John,
the heir-at-law. To Lucretia Clavering, without a word of endearment,
was bequeathed 10,000 pounds,--the usual portion which the house of St.
John had allotted to its daughters; to Susan Mivers the same sum, but
with the addition of these words, withheld from her sister: “and my
blessing!” To Olivier Dalibard an annuity of 200 pounds a year; to
Honore Gabriel Varney, 3,000 pounds; to the Rev. Matthew Fielden, 4,000
pounds; and the same sum to John Walter Ardworth. To his favourite
servant, Henry Jones, an ample provision, and the charge of his dogs
Dash and Ponto, with an allowance therefor, to be paid weekly, and cease
at their deaths. Poor old man! he made it the interest of their guardian
not to grudge their lease of life. To his other attendants, suitable and
munificent bequests, proportioned to the length of their services.
For his body, he desired it to be buried in the vault of his ancestors
without pomp, but without a pretence to a humility which he had not
manifested in life; and he requested that a small miniature in his
writing-desk should be placed in his coffin. That last injunction was
more than a sentiment,--it bespoke the moral conviction of the happiness
the original might have conferred on his life. Of that happiness his
pride had deprived him; nor did he repent, for he had deemed pride a
duty. But the mute likeness, buried in his grave,--that told the might
of the sacrifice he had made! Death removes all distinctions, and in the
coffin the Lord of Laughton might choose his partner.

When the will had been read, Mr. Parchmount produced two letters, one
addressed, in the hand of the deceased, to Mr. Vernon, the other in
the lawyer’s own hand to Miss Clavering. The last enclosed the fragment
found on Sir Miles’s table, and her own letter to Mainwaring, redirected
to her in Sir Miles’s boldest and stateliest autograph. He had, no
doubt, meant to return it in the letter left uncompleted.

The letter to Vernon contained a copy of Lucretia’s fatal epistle, and
the following lines to Vernon himself:--

MY DEAR CHARLES,--With much deliberation, and with natural reluctance to
reveal to you my niece’s shame, I feel it my duty to transmit to you the
accompanying enclosure, copied from the original with my own hand, which
the task sullied.

I do so first, because otherwise you might, as I should have done
in your place, feel bound in honour to persist in the offer of your
hand,--feel bound the more, because Miss Clavering is not my heiress;
secondly, because had her attachment been stronger than her interest,
and she had refused your offer, you might still have deemed her hardly
and capriciously dealt with by me, and not only sought to augment her
portion, but have profaned the house of my ancestors by receiving
her there as an honoured and welcome relative and guest. Now, Charles
Vernon, I believe, to the utmost of my poor judgment, I have done what
is right and just. I have taken into consideration that this young
person has been brought up as a daughter of my house, and what the
daughters of my house have received, I bequeath her. I put aside, as far
as I can, all resentment of mere family pride; I show that I do so, when
I repair my harshness to my poor sister, and leave both her children the
same provision. And if you exceed what I have done for Lucretia, unless,
on more dispassionate consideration than I can give, you conscientiously
think me wrong, you insult my memory--and impugn my justice. Be it in
this as your conscience dictates; but I entreat, I adjure, I command,
at least that you never knowingly admit by a hearth, hitherto sacred
to unblemished truth and honour, a person who has desecrated it
with treason. As gentleman to gentleman, I impose on you this solemn
injunction. I could have wished to leave that young woman’s children
barred from the entail; but our old tree has so few branches! You
are unwedded; Susan too. I must take my chance that Miss Clavering’s
children, if ever they inherit, do not imitate the mother. I conclude
she will wed that Mainwaring; her children will have a low-born father.
Well, her race at least is pure,--Clavering and St. John are names to
guarantee faith and honour; yet you see what she is! Charles Vernon, if
her issue inherit the soul of gentlemen, it must come, after all, not
from the well-born mother! I have lived to say this,--I who--But perhaps
if we had looked more closely into the pedigree of those Claverings--.

Marry yourself,--marry soon, Charles Vernon, my dear kinsman; keep the
old house in the old line, and true to its old fame. Be kind and good to
my poor; don’t strain on the tenants. By the way, Farmer Strongbow owes
three years’ rent,--I forgive him. Pension him off; he can do no good to
the land, but he was born on it, and must not fall on the parish. But to
be kind and good to the poor, not to strain the tenants, you must learn
not to waste, my dear Charles. A needy man can never be generous without
being unjust. How give, if you are in debt? You will think of this
now,--now,--while your good heart is soft, while your feelings are
moved. Charley Vernon, I think you will shed a tear when you see my
armchair still and empty. And I would have left you the care of my dogs,
but you are thoughtless, and will go much to London, and they are used
to the country now. Old Jones will have a cottage in the village,--he
has promised to live there; drop in now and then, and see poor Ponto
and Dash. It is late, and old friends come to dine here. So, if anything
happens to me, and we don’t meet again, good-by, and God bless you.

Your affectionate kinsman, MILES ST. JOHN.



