
The 8th of September, 1831, was a holiday in London. William the Fourth
received the crown of his ancestors in that mighty church in which the
most impressive monitors to human pomp are the monuments of the dead.
The dust of conquerors and statesmen, of the wise heads and the bold
hands that had guarded the thrones of departed kings, slept around; and
the great men of the Modern time were assembled in homage to the monarch
to whom the prowess and the liberty of generations had bequeathed an
empire in which the sun never sets. In the Abbey--thinking little of the
past, caring little for the future--the immense audience gazed eagerly
on the pageant that occurs but once in that division of history,--the
lifetime of a king. The assemblage was brilliant and imposing. The
galleries sparkled with the gems of women who still upheld the celebrity
for form and feature which, from the remotest times, has been awarded to
the great English race. Below, in their robes and coronets, were men
who neither in the senate nor the field have shamed their fathers.
Conspicuous amongst all for grandeur of mien and stature towered the
brothers of the king; while, commanding yet more the universal gaze,
were seen, here the eagle features of the old hero of Waterloo, and
there the majestic brow of the haughty statesman who was leading the
people (while the last of the Bourbons, whom Waterloo had restored to
the Tuileries, had left the orb and purple to the kindred house so fatal
to his name) through a stormy and perilous transition to a bloodless
revolution and a new charter.

Tier upon tier, in the division set apart for them, the members of the
Lower House moved and murmured above the pageant; and the coronation of
the new sovereign was connected in their minds with the great measure
which, still undecided, made at that time a link between the People
and the King, and arrayed against both, if not, indeed, the real
Aristocracy, at least the Chamber recognized by the Constitution as
its representative. Without the space was one dense mass. Houses,
from balcony to balcony, window to window, were filled as some immense
theatre. Up, through the long thoroughfare to Whitehall, the eye saw
that audience,--A PEOPLE; and the gaze was bounded at the spot where
Charles the First had passed from the banquet-house to the scaffold.

The ceremony was over, the procession had swept slowly by, the last
huzza had died away; and after staring a while upon Orator Hunt, who
had clambered up the iron palisade near Westminster Hall, to exhibit his
goodly person in his court attire, the serried crowds, hurrying from
the shower which then unseasonably descended, broke into large masses or
lengthening columns.

In that part of London which may be said to form a boundary between
its old and its new world, by which, on the one hand, you pass to
Westminster, or through that gorge of the Strand which leads along
endless rows of shops that have grown up on the sites of the
ancient halls of the Salisburys and the Exeters, the Buckinghams and
Southamptons; to the heart of the City built around the primeval palace
of the “Tower;” while, on the other hand, you pass into the new city of
aristocracy and letters, of art and fashion, embracing the whilom chase
of Marylebone, and the once sedge-grown waters of Pimlico,--by this
ignoble boundary (the crossing from the Opera House, at the bottom of
the Haymarket, to the commencement of Charing Cross) stood a person
whose discontented countenance was in singular contrast with the general
gayety and animation of the day. This person, O gentle reader, this
sour, querulous, discontented person, was a king, too, in his own walk!
None might dispute it. He feared no rebel; he was harassed by no reform;
he ruled without ministers. Tools he had; but when worn out, he replaced
them without a pension or a sigh. He lived by taxes, but they were
voluntary; and his Civil List was supplied without demand for the
redress of grievances. This person, nevertheless, not deposed, was
suspended from his empire for the day. He was pushed aside; he was
forgotten. He was not distinct from the crowd. Like Titus, he had lost
a day,--his vocation was gone. This person was the Sweeper of the
Crossing!

He was a character. He was young, in the fairest prime of youth; but it
was the face of an old man on young shoulders. His hair was long,
thin, and prematurely streaked with gray; his face was pale and deeply
furrowed; his eyes were hollow, and their stare gleamed, cold and
stolid, under his bent and shaggy brows. The figure was at once fragile
and ungainly, and the narrow shoulders curved in a perpetual stoop.
It was a person, once noticed, that you would easily remember, and
associate with some undefined, painful impression. The manner was
humble, but not meek; the voice was whining, but without pathos. There
was a meagre, passionless dulness about the aspect, though at times
it quickened into a kind of avid acuteness. No one knew by what human
parentage this personage came into the world. He had been reared by
the charity of a stranger, crept through childhood and misery and
rags mysteriously; and suddenly succeeded an old defunct negro in
the profitable crossing whereat he is now standing. All education was
unknown to him, so was all love. In those festive haunts at St. Giles’s
where he who would see “life in London” may often discover the boy who
has held his horse in the morning dancing merrily with his chosen damsel
at night, our sweeper’s character was austere as Charles the Twelfth’s.
And the poor creature had his good qualities. He was sensitively alive
to kindness,--little enough had been shown him to make the luxury the
more prized from its rarity! Though fond of money, he would part with it
(we do not say cheerfully, but part with it still),--not to mere want,
indeed (for he had been too pinched and starved himself, and had grown
too obtuse to pinching and to starving for the sensitiveness that
prompts to charity), but to any of his companions who had done him a
good service, or who had even warmed his dull heart by a friendly smile.
He was honest, too,--honest to the backbone. You might have trusted
him with gold untold. Through the heavy clod which man’s care had not
moulded, nor books enlightened, nor the priest’s solemn lore informed,
still natural rays from the great parent source of Deity struggled,
fitful and dim. He had no lawful name; none knew if sponsors had ever
stood security for his sins at the sacred fount. But he had christened
himself by the strange, unchristian like name of “Beck.” There he was,
then, seemingly without origin, parentage, or kindred tie,--a lonesome,
squalid, bloodless thing, which the great monster, London, seemed
to have spawned forth of its own self; one of its sickly, miserable,
rickety offspring, whom it puts out at nurse to Penury, at school to
Starvation, and, finally, and literally, gives them stones for bread,
with the option of the gallows or the dunghill when the desperate
offspring calls on the giant mother for return and home.

And this creature did love something,--loved, perhaps, some
fellow-being; of that hereafter, when we dive into the secrets of his
privacy. Meanwhile, openly and frankly, he loved his crossing; he was
proud of his crossing; he was grateful to his crossing. God help thee,
son of the street, why not? He had in it a double affection,--that of
serving and being served. He kept the crossing, if the crossing kept
him. He smiled at times to himself when he saw it lie fair and brilliant
amidst the mire around; it bestowed on him a sense of property! What
a man may feel for a fine estate in a ring fence, Beck felt for that
isthmus of the kennel which was subject to his broom. The coronation had
made one rebellious spirit when it swept the sweeper from his crossing.

He stood, then, half under the colonnade of the Opera House as the crowd
now rapidly grew thinner and more scattered: and when the last carriage
of a long string of vehicles had passed by, he muttered audibly,--

“It’ll take a deal of pains to make she right agin!”

“So you be’s ‘ere to-day, Beck!” said a ragamuffin boy, who, pushing and
scrambling through his betters, now halted, and wiped his forehead as he
looked at the sweeper. “Vy, ve are all out pleasuring. Vy von’t you come
with ve? Lots of fun!”

The sweeper scowled at the urchin, and made no answer, but began
sedulously to apply himself to the crossing.

“Vy, there isn’t another sweep in the streets, Beck. His Majesty King
Bill’s currynation makes all on us so ‘appy!”

“It has made she unkimmon dirty!” returned Beck, pointing to the dingy
crossing, scarce distinguished from the rest of the road.

The ragamuffin laughed.

“But ve be’s goin’ to ‘ave Reform now, Beck. The peopul’s to have their
rights and libties, hand the luds is to be put down, hand beefsteaks is
to be a penny a pound, and--”

“What good will that do to she?”

“Vy, man, ve shall take turn about, and sum vun helse will sveep
the crossings, and ve shall ride in sum vun helse’s coach and four,
p’r’aps,--cos vy? ve shall hall be hequals!”

“Hequals! I tells you vot, if you keeps jawing there, atween me and she,
I shall vop you, Joe,--cos vy? I be’s the biggest!” was the answer of
Beck the sweeper to Joe the ragamuffin.

The jovial Joe laughed aloud, snapped his fingers, threw up his ragged
cap with a shout for King Bill, and set off scampering and whooping to
join those festivities which Beck had so churlishly disdained.

Time crept on; evening began to close in, and Beck was still at his
crossing, when a young gentleman on horseback, who, after seeing the
procession, had stolen away for a quiet ride in the suburbs, reined in
close by the crossing, and looking round, as for some one to hold his
horse, could discover no loiterer worthy that honour except the solitary
Beck. So young was the rider that he seemed still a boy. On his smooth
countenance all that most prepossesses in early youth left its witching
stamp. A smile, at once gay and sweet, played on his lips. There was a
charm, even in a certain impatient petulance, in his quick eye and the
slight contraction of his delicate brows. Almaviva might well have been
jealous of such a page. He was the beau-ideal of Cherubino. He held up
his whip, with an arch sign, to the sweeper. “Follow, my man,” he said,
in a tone the very command of which sounded gentle, so blithe was
the movement of the lips, and so silvery the easy accent; and without
waiting, he cantered carelessly down Pall Mall.

The sweeper cast a rueful glance at his melancholy domain. But he
had gained but little that day, and the offer was too tempting to be
rejected. He heaved a sigh, shouldered his broom, and murmuring to
himself that he would give her a last brush before he retired for the
night, he put his long limbs into that swinging, shambling trot which
characterizes the motion of those professional jackals who, having once
caught sight of a groomless rider, fairly hunt him down, and appear when
he least expects it, the instant he dismounts. The young rider lightly
swung himself from his sleek, high-bred gray at the door of one of the
clubs in St. James’s Street, patted his horse’s neck, chucked the rein
to the sweeper, and sauntered into the house, whistling musically,--if
not from want of thought, certainly from want of care.

As he entered the club, two or three men, young indeed, but much older,
to appearance at least, than himself, who were dining together at the
same table, nodded to him their friendly greeting.

“Ah, Perce,” said one, “we have only just sat down; here is a seat for
you.”

The boy blushed shyly as he accepted the proposal, and the young men
made room for him at the table, with a smiling alacrity which showed
that his shyness was no hindrance to his popularity.

“Who,” said an elderly dandy, dining apart with one of his
contemporaries,--“who is that lad? One ought not to admit such mere boys
into the club.”

“He is the only surviving son of an old friend of ours,” answered the
other, dropping his eyeglass,--“young Percival St. John.”

“St. John! What! Vernon St. John’s son?”

“Yes.”

“He has not his father’s good air. These young fellows have a tone, a
something,--a want of self-possession, eh?”

“Very true. The fact is, that Percival was meant for the navy, and even
served as a mid for a year or so. He was a younger son, then,--third,
I think. The two elder ones died, and Master Percival walked into the
inheritance. I don’t think he is quite of age yet.”

“Of age! he does not look seventeen.”

“Oh, he is more than that; I remember him in his jacket at Laughton. A
fine property!”

“Ay, I don’t wonder those fellows are so civil to him. This claret is
corked! Everything is so bad at this d----d club,--no wonder, when a
troop of boys are let in! Enough to spoil any club; don’t know Larose
from Lafitte! Waiter!”

Meanwhile, the talk round the table at which sat Percival St. John was
animated, lively, and various,--the talk common with young idlers; of
horses, and steeplechases, and opera-dancers, and reigning beauties,
and good-humoured jests at each other. In all this babble there was a
freshness about Percival St. John’s conversation which showed that, as
yet, for him life had the zest of novelty. He was more at home about
horses and steeplechases than about opera-dancers and beauties and the
small scandals of town. Talk on these latter topics did not seem to
interest him, on the contrary, almost to pain. Shy and modest as a girl,
he coloured or looked aside when his more hardened friends boasted of
assignations and love-affairs. Spirited, gay, and manly enough in all
really manly points, the virgin bloom of innocence was yet visible in
his frank, charming manner; and often, out of respect for his delicacy,
some hearty son of pleasure stopped short in his narrative, or lost
the point of his anecdote. And yet so lovable was Percival in his good
humour, his naivete, his joyous entrance into innocent joy, that his
companions were scarcely conscious of the gene and restraint he
imposed on them. Those merry, dark eyes and that flashing smile
were conviviality of themselves. They brought with them a contagious
cheerfulness which compensated for the want of corruption.

Night had set in. St. John’s companions had departed to their several
haunts, and Percival himself stood on the steps of the club, resolving
that he would join the crowds that swept through the streets to gaze
on the illuminations, when he perceived Beck (still at the rein of his
dozing horse), whom he had quite forgotten till that moment. Laughing at
his own want of memory, Percival put some silver into Beck’s hand,--more
silver than Beck had ever before received for similar service,--and
said,--

“Well, my man, I suppose I can trust you to take my horse to his
stables,--No.----, the Mews, behind Curzon Street. Poor fellow, he wants
his supper,--and you, too, I suppose!”

Beck smiled a pale, hungry smile, and pulled his forelock politely.

“I can take the ‘oss werry safely, your ‘onor.”

“Take him, then, and good evening; but don’t get on, for your life.”

“Oh, no, sir; I never gets on,--‘t aint in my ways.”

And Beck slowly led the horse through the crowd, till he vanished from
Percival’s eyes.

Just then a man passing through the street paused as he saw the young
gentleman on the steps of the club, and said gayly, “Ah! how do you do?
Pretty faces in plenty out to-night. Which way are you going?”

“That is more than I can tell you, Mr. Varney. I was just thinking which
turn to take,--the right or the left.”

“Then let me be your guide;” and Varney offered his arm.

Percival accepted the courtesy, and the two walked on towards
Piccadilly. Many a kind glance from the milliners--and maid-servants
whom the illuminations drew abroad, roved, somewhat impartially, towards
St. John and his companion; but they dwelt longer on the last, for there
at least they were sure of a return. Varney, if not in his first youth,
was still in the prime of life, and Time had dealt with him so leniently
that he retained all the personal advantages of youth itself. His
complexion still was clear; and as only his upper lip, decorated with
a slight silken and well-trimmed mustache, was unshaven, the contour
of the face added to the juvenility of his appearance by the rounded
symmetry it betrayed. His hair escaped from his hat in fair unchanged
luxuriance. And the nervous figure, agile as a panther’s, though
broad-shouldered and deep-chested, denoted all the slightness and
elasticity of twenty-five, combined with the muscular power of forty.
His dress was rather fantastic,--too showy for the good taste which is
habitual to the English gentleman,--and there was a peculiarity in his
gait, almost approaching to a strut, which bespoke a desire of effect,
a consciousness of personal advantages, equally opposed to the mien
and manner of Percival’s usual companions; yet withal, even the most
fastidious would have hesitated to apply to Gabriel Varney the epithet
of “vulgar.” Many turned to look again, but it was not to remark the
dress or the slight swagger; an expression of reckless, sinister power
in the countenance, something of vigour and determination even in that
very walk, foppish as it would have been in most, made you sink all
observation of the mere externals, in a sentiment of curiosity towards
the man himself. He seemed a somebody,--not a somebody of conventional
rank, but a somebody of personal individuality; an artist, perhaps a
poet, or a soldier in some foreign service, but certainly a man whose
name you would expect to have heard of. Amongst the common mob of
passengers he stood out in marked and distinct relief.

“I feel at home in a crowd,” said Varney. “Do you understand me?”

“I think so,” answered Percival. “If ever I could become distinguished,
I, too, should feel at home in a crowd.”

“You have ambition, then; you mean to become distinguished?” asked
Varney, with a sharp, searching look.

There was a deeper and steadier flash than usual from Percival’s dark
eyes, and a manlier glow over his cheek, at Varney’s question. But he
was slow in answering; and when he did so, his manner had all its wonted
mixture of graceful bashfulness and gay candour.

“Our rise does not always depend on ourselves. We are not all born
great, nor do we all have ‘greatness thrust on us.’”

“One can be what one likes, with your fortune,” said Varney; and there
was a growl of envy in his voice.

“What, be a painter like you! Ha, ha!”

“Faith,” said Varney, “at least, if you could paint at all, you would
have what I have not,--praise and fame.”

Percival pressed kindly on Varney’s arm. “Courage! you will get justice
some day.”

Varney shook his head. “Bah! there is no such thing as justice; all are
underrated or overrated. Can you name one man who you think is estimated
by the public at his precise value? As for present popularity, it
depends on two qualities, each singly, or both united,--cowardice and
charlatanism; that is, servile compliance with the taste and opinion of
the moment, or a quack’s spasmodic efforts at originality. But why bore
you on such matters? There are things more attractive round us. A good
ankle that, eh? Why, pardon me, it is strange, but you don’t seem to
care much for women?”

“Oh, yes, I do,” said Percival, with a sly demureness. “I am very fond
of--my mother!”

“Very proper and filial,” said Varney, laughing; “and does your love for
the sex stop there?”

“Well, and in truth I fancy so,--pretty nearly. You know my grandmother
is not alive! But that is something really worth looking at!” And
Percival pointed, almost with a child’s delight, at an illumination more
brilliant than the rest.

“I suppose, when you come of age, you will have all the cedars at
Laughton hung with coloured lamps. Ah, you must ask me there some day; I
should so like to see the old place again.”

“You never saw it, I think you say, in my poor father’s time?”

“Never.”

“Yet you knew him.”

“But slightly.”

“And you never saw my mother?”

“No; but she seems to have such influence over you that I am sure she
must be a very superior person,--rather proud, I suppose.”

“Proud, no,--that is, not exactly proud, for she is very meek and very
affable. But yet--”

“‘But yet--’ You hesitate: she would not like you to be seen, perhaps,
walking in Piccadilly with Gabriel Varney, the natural son of old Sir
Miles’s librarian,--Gabriel Varney the painter; Gabriel Varney the
adventurer!”

“As long as Gabriel Varney is a man without stain on his character and
honour, my mother would only be pleased that I should know an able and
accomplished person, whatever his origin or parentage. But my mother
would be sad if she knew me intimate with a Bourbon or a Raphael, the
first in rank or the first in genius, if either prince or artist had
lost, or even sullied, his scutcheon of gentleman. In a word, she is
most sensitive as to honour and conscience; all else she disregards.”

“Hem!” Varney stooped down, as if examining the polish of his boot,
while he continued carelessly: “Impossible to walk the streets and keep
one’s boots out of the mire. Well--and you agree with your mother?”

“It would be strange if I did not. When I was scarcely four years old,
my poor father used to lead me through the long picture-gallery at
Laughton and say: ‘Walk through life as if those brave gentlemen looked
down on you.’ And,” added St. John, with his ingenuous smile, “my mother
would put in her word,--‘And those unstained women too, my Percival.’”

There was something noble and touching in the boy’s low accents as
he said this; it gave the key to his unusual modesty and his frank,
healthful innocence of character.

The devil in Varney’s lip sneered mockingly.

“My young friend, you have never loved yet. Do you think you ever
shall?”

“I have dreamed that I could love one day. But I can wait.”

Varney was about to reply, when he was accosted abruptly by three men
of that exaggerated style of dress and manner which is implied by the
vulgar appellation of “Tigrish.” Each of the three men had a cigar in
his mouth, each seemed flushed with wine. One wore long brass spurs and
immense mustaches; another was distinguished by an enormous surface of
black satin cravat, across which meandered a Pactolus of gold chain;
a third had his coat laced and braided a la Polonaise, and pinched and
padded a la Russe, with trousers shaped to the calf of a sinewy leg, and
a glass screwed into his right eye.

“Ah, Gabriel! ah, Varney! ah, prince of good fellows, well met! You sup
with us to-night at little Celeste’s; we were just going in search of
you.”

“Who’s your friend,--one of us?” whispered a second. And the third
screwed his arm tight and lovingly into Varney’s.

Gabriel, despite his habitual assurance, looked abashed foz a moment,
and would have extricated himself from cordialities not at that moment
welcome; but he saw that his friends were too far gone in their cups
to be easily shaken off, and he felt relieved when Percival, after a
dissatisfied glance at the three, said quietly: “I must detain you no
longer; I shall soon look in at your studio;” and without waiting for an
answer, slid off, and was lost among the crowd.

Varney walked on with his new-found friends, unheeding for some moments
their loose remarks and familiar banter. At length he shook off his
abstraction, and surrendering himself to the coarse humours of his
companions, soon eclipsed them all by the gusto of his slang and the
mocking profligacy of his sentiments; for here he no longer played a
part, or suppressed his grosser instincts. That uncurbed dominion of the
senses, to which his very boyhood had abandoned itself, found a willing
slave in the man. Even the talents themselves that he displayed came
from the cultivation of the sensual. His eye, studying externals, made
him a painter,--his ear, quick and practised, a musician. His wild,
prodigal fancy rioted on every excitement, and brought him in a vast
harvest of experience in knowledge of the frailties and the vices on
which it indulged its vagrant experiments. Men who over-cultivate the
art that connects itself with the senses, with little counterpoise from
the reason and pure intellect, are apt to be dissipated and irregular
in their lives. This is frequently noticeable in the biographies of
musicians, singers, and painters; less so in poets, because he who deals
with words, not signs and tones, must perpetually compare his senses
with the pure images of which the senses only see the appearances,--in a
word, he must employ his intellect, and his self-education must be large
and comprehensive. But with most real genius, however fed merely by the
senses,--most really great painters, singers, and musicians, however
easily led astray into temptation,--the richness of the soil throws
up abundant good qualities to countervail or redeem the evil; they are
usually compassionate, generous, sympathizing. That Varney had not such
beauties of soul and temperament it is unnecessary to add,--principally,
it is true, because of his nurture, education, parental example, the
utter corruption in which his childhood and youth had passed; partly
because he had no real genius,---it was a false apparition of the divine
spirit, reflected from the exquisite perfection of his frame (which
rendered all his senses so vigorous and acute) and his riotous fancy and
his fitful energy, which was capable at times of great application, but
not of definite purpose or earnest study. All about him was flashy
and hollow. He had not the natural subtlety and depth of mind that had
characterized his terrible father. The graft of the opera-dancer was
visible on the stock of the scholar; wholly without the habits of method
and order, without the patience, without the mathematical calculating
brain of Dalibard, he played wantonly with the horrible and loathsome
wickedness of which Olivier had made dark and solemn study. Extravagant
and lavish, he spent money as fast as he gained it; he threw away all
chances of eminence and career. In the midst of the direst plots of
his villany or the most energetic pursuit of his art, the poorest
excitement, the veriest bauble would draw him aside. His heart was with
Falri in the sty, his fancy with Aladdin in the palace. To make a show
was his darling object; he loved to create effect by his person, his
talk, his dress, as well as by his talents. Living from hand to mouth,
crimes through which it is not our intention to follow him had at times
made him rich to-day, for vices to make him poor again to-morrow.
What he called “luck,” or “his star,” had favoured him,--he was not
hanged!--he lived; and as the greater part of his unscrupulous career
had been conducted in foreign lands and under other names, in his own
name and in his own country, though something scarcely to be defined,
but equivocal and provocative of suspicion, made him displeasing to
the prudent, and vaguely alarmed the experience of the sober, still,
no positive accusation was attached to the general integrity of his
character, and the mere dissipation of his habits was naturally little
known out of his familiar circle. Hence he had the most presumptuous
confidence in himself,--a confidence native to his courage, and
confirmed by his experience. His conscience was so utterly obtuse that
he might almost be said to present the phenomenon of a man without
conscience at all. Unlike Conrad, he did not “know himself a villain;”
 all that he knew of himself was that he was a remarkably clever fellow,
without prejudice or superstition. That, with all his gifts, he had
not succeeded better in life, he ascribed carelessly to the surpassing
wisdom of his philosophy. He could have done better if he had enjoyed
himself less; but was not enjoyment the be-all and end-all of this
little life? More often, indeed, in the moods of his bitter envy, he
would lay the fault upon the world. How great he could have been, if he
had been rich and high-born! Oh, he was made to spend, not to save,--to
command, not to fawn! He was not formed to plod through the dull
mediocrities of fortune; he must toss up for the All or the Nothing! It
was no control over himself that made Varney now turn his thoughts from
certain grave designs on Percival St. John to the brutal debauchery of
his three companions,--rather, he then yielded most to his natural
self. And when the morning star rose over the night he passed with low
profligates and venal nymphs; when over the fragments on the board and
emptied bottles and drunken riot dawn gleamed and saw him in all the
pride of his magnificent organization and the cynicism of his measured
vice, fair, fresh, and blooming amidst those maudlin eyes and flushed
cheeks and reeling figures, laughing hideously over the spectacle he had
provoked, and kicking aside, with a devil’s scorn, the prostrate form of
the favoured partner whose head had rested on his bosom, as alone with
a steady step, he passed the threshold and walked into the fresh,
healthful air,--Gabriel Varney enjoyed the fell triumph of his hell-born
vanity, and revelled in his sentiment of superiority and power.

Meanwhile, on quitting Varney young Percival strolled on as the whim
directed him. Turning down the Haymarket, he gained the colonnade of
the Opera House. The crowd there was so dense that his footsteps were
arrested, and he leaned against one of the columns in admiration of the
various galaxies in view. In front blazed the rival stars of the United
Service Club and the Athenaeum; to the left, the quaint and peculiar
device which lighted up Northumberland House; to the right, the anchors,
cannons, and bombs which typified ingeniously the martial attributes of
the Ordnance Office.

At that moment there were three persons connected with this narrative
within a few feet of each other, distinguished from the multitude by the
feelings with which each regarded the scene, and felt the jostle of the
crowd. Percival St. John, in whom the harmless sense of pleasure was
yet vivid and unsatiated, caught from the assemblage only that physical
hilarity which heightened his own spirits. If in a character as yet so
undeveloped, to which the large passions and stern ends of life were
as yet unknown, stirred some deeper and more musing thoughts and
speculations, giving gravity to the habitual smile on his rosy lip, and
steadying the play of his sparkling eyes, he would have been at a loss
himself to explain the dim sentiment and the vague desire.

Screened by another column from the pressure of the mob, with his arms
folded on his breast, a man some few years older in point of
time,--many years older in point of character,--gazed (with thoughts how
turbulent,--with ambition how profound!) upon the dense and dark masses
that covered space and street far as the eye could reach. He, indeed,
could not have said, with Varney, that he was “at home in a crowd.” For
a crowd did not fill him with the sense of his own individual being
and importance, but grappled him to its mighty breast with the thousand
tissues of a common destiny. Who shall explain and disentangle those
high and restless and interwoven emotions with which intellectual
ambition, honourable and ardent, gazes upon that solemn thing with
which, in which, for which it lives and labours,--the Human Multitude?
To that abstracted, solitary man, the illumination, the festivity, the
curiosity, the holiday, were nothing, or but as fleeting phantoms and
vain seemings. In his heart’s eye he saw before him but the PEOPLE, the
shadow of an everlasting audience,--audience at once and judge.

And literally touching him as he stood, the ragged sweeper, who had
returned in vain to devote a last care to his beloved charge, stood
arrested with the rest, gazing joylessly on the blazing lamps, dead as
the stones he heeded, to the young vivacity of the one man, the solemn
visions of the other. So, O London, amidst the universal holiday to
monarch and to mob, in those three souls lived the three elements which,
duly mingled and administered, make thy vice and thy virtue, thy glory
and thy shame, thy labour and thy luxury; pervading the palace and the
street, the hospital and the prison,--enjoyment, which is pleasure;
energy, which is action; torpor, which is want!



