
_Containing certain adventures which befel Mr. Booth in the prison._


The remainder of the day Mr. Booth spent in melancholy contemplation
on his present condition. He was destitute of the common necessaries of
life, and consequently unable to subsist where he was; nor was there a
single person in town to whom he could, with any reasonable hope, apply
for his delivery. Grief for some time banished the thoughts of food from
his mind; but in the morning nature began to grow uneasy for want of
her usual nourishment: for he had not eat a morsel during the last forty
hours. A penny loaf, which is, it seems, the ordinary allowance to the
prisoners in Bridewell, was now delivered him; and while he was eating
this a man brought him a little packet sealed up, informing him that it
came by a messenger, who said it required no answer.

Mr. Booth now opened his packet, and, after unfolding several pieces of
blank paper successively, at last discovered a guinea, wrapt with great
care in the inmost paper. He was vastly surprized at this sight, as he
had few if any friends from whom he could expect such a favour, slight
as it was; and not one of his friends, as he was apprized, knew of his
confinement. As there was no direction to the packet, nor a word of
writing contained in it, he began to suspect that it was delivered to
the wrong person; and being one of the most untainted honesty, he found
out the man who gave it him, and again examined him concerning the
person who brought it, and the message delivered with it. The man
assured Booth that he had made no mistake; saying, “If your name is
Booth, sir, I am positive you are the gentleman to whom the parcel I
gave you belongs.”

The most scrupulous honesty would, perhaps, in such a situation,
have been well enough satisfied in finding no owner for the guinea;
especially when proclamation had been made in the prison that Mr. Booth
had received a packet without any direction, to which, if any person had
any claim, and would discover the contents, he was ready to deliver it
to such claimant. No such claimant being found (I mean none who knew
the contents; for many swore that they expected just such a packet, and
believed it to be their property), Mr. Booth very calmly resolved to
apply the money to his own use.

The first thing after redemption of the coat, which Mr. Booth, hungry as
he was, thought of, was to supply himself with snuff, which he had long,
to his great sorrow, been without. On this occasion he presently missed
that iron box which the methodist had so dexterously conveyed out of his
pocket, as we mentioned in the last chapter.

He no sooner missed this box than he immediately suspected that the
gambler was the person who had stolen it; nay, so well was he assured
of this man’s guilt, that it may, perhaps, be improper to say he barely
suspected it. Though Mr. Booth was, as we have hinted, a man of a very
sweet disposition, yet was he rather overwarm. Having, therefore, no
doubt concerning the person of the thief, he eagerly sought him out, and
very bluntly charged him with the fact.

The gambler, whom I think we should now call the philosopher, received
this charge without the least visible emotion either of mind or muscle.
After a short pause of a few moments, he answered, with great solemnity,
as follows: “Young man, I am entirely unconcerned at your groundless
suspicion. He that censures a stranger, as I am to you, without any
cause, makes a worse compliment to himself than to the stranger. You
know yourself, friend; you know not me. It is true, indeed, you heard me
accused of being a cheat and a gamester; but who is my accuser? Look at
my apparel, friend; do thieves and gamesters wear such cloaths as these?
play is my folly, not my vice; it is my impulse, and I have been a
martyr to it. Would a gamester have asked another to play when he
could have lost eighteen-pence and won nothing? However, if you are not
satisfied, you may search my pockets; the outside of all but one will
serve your turn, and in that one there is the eighteen-pence I told you
of.” He then turned up his cloaths; and his pockets entirely resembled
the pitchers of the Belides.

Booth was a little staggered at this defence. He said the real value
of the iron box was too inconsiderable to mention; but that he had a
capricious value for it, for the sake of the person who gave it him;
“for, though it is not,” said he, “worth sixpence, I would willingly
give a crown to any one who would bring it me again.”

Robinson answered, “If that be the case, you have nothing more to do
but to signify your intention in the prison, and I am well convinced you
will not be long without regaining the possession of your snuff-box.”

This advice was immediately followed, and with success, the methodist
presently producing the box, which, he said, he had found, and should
have returned it before, had he known the person to whom it belonged;
adding, with uplifted eyes, that the spirit would not suffer him
knowingly to detain the goods of another, however inconsiderable the
value was. “Why so, friend?” said Robinson. “Have I not heard you often
say, the wickeder any man was the better, provided he was what you call
a believer?” “You mistake me,” cries Cooper (for that was the name
of the methodist): “no man can be wicked after he is possessed by the
spirit. There is a wide difference between the days of sin and the
days of grace. I have been a sinner myself.” “I believe thee,” cries
Robinson, with a sneer. “I care not,” answered the other, “what an
atheist believes. I suppose you would insinuate that I stole the
snuff-box; but I value not your malice; the Lord knows my innocence.”
 He then walked off with the reward; and Booth, turning to Robinson, very
earnestly asked pardon for his groundless suspicion; which the other,
without any hesitation, accorded him, saying, “You never accused me,
sir; you suspected some gambler, with whose character I have no concern.
I should be angry with a friend or acquaintance who should give a hasty
credit to any allegation against me; but I have no reason to be offended
with you for believing what the woman, and the rascal who is just gone,
and who is committed here for a pickpocket, which you did not perhaps
know, told you to my disadvantage. And if you thought me to be a gambler
you had just reason to suspect any ill of me; for I myself am confined
here by the perjury of one of those villains, who, having cheated me of
my money at play, and hearing that I intended to apply to a magistrate
against him, himself began the attack, and obtained a warrant against
me of Justice Thrasher, who, without hearing one speech in my defence,
committed me to this place.”

Booth testified great compassion at this account; and, he having invited
Robinson to dinner, they spent that day together. In the afternoon Booth
indulged his friend with a game at cards; at first for halfpence and
afterwards for shillings, when fortune so favoured Robinson that he did
not leave the other a single shilling in his pocket.

A surprizing run of luck in a gamester is often mistaken for somewhat
else by persons who are not over-zealous believers in the divinity of
fortune. I have known a stranger at Bath, who hath happened fortunately
(I might almost say unfortunately) to have four by honours in his hand
almost every time he dealt for a whole evening, shunned universally
by the whole company the next day. And certain it is, that Mr. Booth,
though of a temper very little inclined to suspicion, began to waver in
his opinion whether the character given by Mr. Robinson of himself, or
that which the others gave of him, was the truer.

In the morning hunger paid him a second visit, and found him again in
the same situation as before. After some deliberation, therefore, he
resolved to ask Robinson to lend him a shilling or two of that money
which was lately his own. And this experiments he thought, would confirm
him either in a good or evil opinion of that gentleman.

To this demand Robinson answered, with great alacrity, that he should
very gladly have complied, had not fortune played one of her jade tricks
with him: “for since my winning of you,” said he, “I have been stript
not only of your money but my own.” He was going to harangue farther;
but Booth, with great indignation, turned from him.

This poor gentleman had very little time to reflect on his own misery,
or the rascality, as it appeared to him, of the other, when the same
person who had the day before delivered him the guinea from the unknown
hand, again accosted him, and told him a lady in the house (so he
expressed himself) desired the favour of his company.

Mr. Booth immediately obeyed the message, and was conducted into a room
in the prison, where he was presently convinced that Mrs. Vincent was no
other than his old acquaintance Miss Matthews.



