
_In which Miss Matthews begins her history._


Miss Matthews, having barred the door on the inside as securely as it
was before barred on the outside, proceeded as follows:

“You may imagine I am going to begin my history at the time when you
left the country; but I cannot help reminding you of something which
happened before. You will soon recollect the incident; but I believe you
little know the consequence either at that time or since. Alas! I could
keep a secret then! now I have no secrets; the world knows all; and it
is not worth my while to conceal anything. Well!--You will not wonder,
I believe.--I protest I can hardly tell it you, even now.---But I am
convinced you have too good an opinion of yourself to be surprized at
any conquest you may have made.---Few men want that good opinion--and
perhaps very few had ever more reason for it. Indeed, Will, you was a
charming fellow in those days; nay, you are not much altered for the
worse now, at least in the opinion of some women; for your complexion
and features are grown much more masculine than they were.” Here Booth
made her a low bow, most probably with a compliment; and after a little
hesitation she again proceeded.---“Do you remember a contest which
happened at an assembly, betwixt myself and Miss Johnson, about standing
uppermost? you was then my partner; and young Williams danced with
the other lady. The particulars are not now worth mentioning, though
I suppose you have long since forgot them. Let it suffice that you
supported my claim, and Williams very sneakingly gave up that of his
partner, who was, with much difficulty, afterwards prevailed to dance
with him. You said--I am sure I repeat the words exactly--that you
would not for the world affront any lady there; but that you thought you
might, without any such danger declare, that there was no assembly in
which that lady, meaning your humble servant, was not worthy of the
uppermost place; ‘nor will I,’ said you, ‘suffer, the first duke in
England, when she is at the uppermost end of the room, and hath called
her dance, to lead his partner above her.’

“What made this the more pleasing to me was, that I secretly hated Miss
Johnson. Will you have the reason? why, then, I will tell you honestly,
she was my rival. That word perhaps astonishes you, as you never, I
believe, heard of any one who made his addresses to me; and indeed my
heart was, till that night, entirely indifferent to all mankind: I
mean, then, that she was my rival for praise, for beauty, for dress, for
fortune, and consequently for admiration. My triumph on this conquest
is not to be expressed any more than my delight in the person to whom I
chiefly owed it. The former, I fancy, was visible to the whole company;
and I desired it should be so; but the latter was so well concealed,
that no one, I am confident, took any notice of it. And yet you
appeared to me that night to be an angel. You looked, you danced, you
spoke-everything charmed me.”

“Good Heavens!” cries Booth, “is it possible you should do me so much
unmerited honour, and I should be dunce enough not to perceive the least
symptom?”

“I assure you,” answered she, “I did all I could to prevent you; and yet
I almost hated you for not seeing through what I strove to hide. Why,
Mr. Booth, was you not more quick-sighted?--I will answer for you--your
affections were more happily disposed of to a much better woman than
myself, whom you married soon afterwards. I should ask you for her,
Mr. Booth; I should have asked you for her before; but I am unworthy of
asking for her, or of calling her my acquaintance.”

Booth stopt her short, as she was running into another fit of passion,
and begged her to omit all former matters, and acquaint him with that
part of her history to which he was an entire stranger.

She then renewed her discourse as follows: “You know, Mr. Booth, I
soon afterwards left that town, upon the death of my grandmother, and
returned home to my father’s house; where I had not been long arrived
before some troops of dragoons came to quarter in our neighbourhood.
Among the officers there was a cornet whose detested name was Hebbers,
a name I could scarce repeat, had I not at the same time the pleasure
to reflect that he is now no more. My father, you know, who is a
hearty well-wisher to the present government, used always to invite
the officers to his house; so did he these. Nor was it long before this
cornet in so particular a manner recommended himself to the poor old
gentleman (I cannot think of him without tears), that our house became
his principal habitation, and he was rarely at his quarters, unless when
his superior officers obliged him to be there. I shall say nothing of
his person, nor could that be any recommendation to a man; it was
such, however, as no woman could have made an objection to. Nature had
certainly wrapt up her odious work in a most beautiful covering. To
say the truth, he was the handsomest man, except one only, that I
ever saw--I assure you, I have seen a handsomer---but--well.--He
had, besides, all the qualifications of a gentleman; was genteel and
extremely polite; spoke French well, and danced to a miracle; but what
chiefly recommended him to my father was his skill in music, of which
you know that dear man was the most violent lover. I wish he was not
too susceptible of flattery on that head; for I have heard Hebbers often
greatly commend my father’s performance, and have observed that the good
man was wonderfully pleased with such commendations. To say the truth,
it is the only way I can account for the extraordinary friendship which
my father conceived for this person; such a friendship, that he at last
became a part of our family.

“This very circumstance, which, as I am convinced, strongly recommended
him to my father, had the very contrary effect with me: I had never any
delight in music, and it was not without much difficulty I was prevailed
on to learn to play on the harpsichord, in which I had made a very
slender progress. As this man, therefore, was frequently the occasion of
my being importuned to play against my will, I began to entertain some
dislike for him on that account; and as to his person, I assure you, I
long continued to look on it with great indifference.

“How strange will the art of this man appear to you presently, who had
sufficient address to convert that very circumstance which had at first
occasioned my dislike into the first seeds of affection for him!

“You have often, I believe, heard my sister Betty play on the
harpsichord; she was, indeed, reputed the best performer in the whole
country.

“I was the farthest in the world from regarding this perfection of hers
with envy. In reality, perhaps, I despised all perfection of this kind:
at least, as I had neither skill nor ambition to excel this way, I
looked upon it as a matter of mere indifference.

“Hebbers first put this emulation in my head. He took great pains to
persuade me that I had much greater abilities of the musical kind than
my sister, and that I might with the greatest ease, if I pleased, excel
her; offering me, at the same time, his assistance if I would resolve to
undertake it.

“When he had sufficiently inflamed my ambition, in which, perhaps, he
found too little difficulty, the continual praises of my sister, which
before I had disregarded, became more and more nauseous in my ears; and
the rather, as, music being the favourite passion of my father, I became
apprehensive (not without frequent hints from Hebbers of that nature)
that she might gain too great a preference in his favour.

“To my harpsichord then I applied myself night and day, with such
industry and attention, that I soon began to perform in a tolerable
manner. I do not absolutely say I excelled my sister, for many were of
a different opinion; but, indeed, there might be some partiality in all
that.

“Hebbers, at least, declared himself on my side, and nobody could doubt
his judgment. He asserted openly that I played in the better manner of
the two; and one day, when I was playing to him alone, he affected to
burst into a rapture of admiration, and, squeezing me gently by the
hand, said, There, madam, I now declare you excel your sister as much in
music as, added he in a whispering sigh, you do her, and all the world,
in every other charm.

“No woman can bear any superiority in whatever thing she desires to
excel in. I now began to hate all the admirers of my sister, to be
uneasy at every commendation bestowed on her skill in music, and
consequently to love Hebbers for the preference which he gave to mine.

“It was now that I began to survey the handsome person of Hebbers with
pleasure. And here, Mr. Booth, I will betray to you the grand secret
of our sex.---Many women, I believe, do, with great innocence, and even
with great indifference, converse with men of the finest persons; but
this I am confident may be affirmed with truth, that, when once a woman
comes to ask this question of herself, Is the man whom I like for some
other reason, handsome? her fate and his too, very strongly depend on
her answering in the affirmative.

“Hebbers no sooner perceived that he had made an impression on my
heart, of which I am satisfied I gave him too undeniable tokens, than he
affected on a sudden to shun me in the most apparent manner. He wore
the most melancholy air in my presence, and, by his dejected looks and
sighs, firmly persuaded me that there was some secret sorrow labouring
in his bosom; nor will it be difficult for you to imagine to what cause
I imputed it.

“Whilst I was wishing for his declaration of a passion in which I
thought I could not be mistaken, and at the same time trembling whenever
we met with the apprehension of this very declaration, the widow Carey
came from London to make us a visit, intending to stay the whole summer
at our house.

“Those who know Mrs. Carey will scarce think I do her an injury in
saying she is far from being handsome; and yet she is as finished a
coquette as if she had the highest beauty to support that character.
But perhaps you have seen her; and if you have I am convinced you will
readily subscribe to my opinion.”

Booth answered he had not; and then she proceeded as in the following
chapter.



