
_The history of Miss Matthews continued_.


“This young lady had not been three days with us before Hebbers grew so
particular with her, that it was generally observed; and my poor father,
who, I believe, loved the cornet as if he had been his son, began to
jest on the occasion, as one who would not be displeased at throwing a
good jointure into the arms of his friend.

“You will easily guess, sir, the disposition of my mind on this
occasion; but I was not permitted to suffer long under it; for one day,
when Hebbers was alone with me, he took an opportunity of expressing
his abhorrence at the thoughts of marrying for interest, contrary to his
inclinations. I was warm on the subject, and, I believe, went so far as
to say that none but fools and villains did so. He replied, with a sigh,
Yes, madam, but what would you think of a man whose heart is all the
while bleeding for another woman, to whom he would willingly sacrifice
the world; but, because he must sacrifice her interest as well as his
own, never durst even give her a hint of that passion which was preying
on his very vitals? ‘Do you believe, Miss Fanny, there is such a wretch
on earth?’ I answered, with an assumed coldness, I did not believe there
was. He then took me gently by the hand, and, with a look so tender that
I cannot describe it, vowed he was himself that wretch. Then starting,
as if conscious of an error committed, he cried with a faltering voice,
‘What am I saying? Pardon me, Miss Fanny; since I beg only your pity, I
never will ask for more.--’ At these words, hearing my father coming
up, I betrayed myself entirely, if, indeed, I had not done it before. I
hastily withdrew my hand, crying, Hush! for heaven’s sake, my father
is just coming in; my blushes, my look, and my accent, telling him, I
suppose, all which he wished to know.

“A few days now brought matters to an eclaircissement between us; the
being undeceived in what had given me so much uneasiness gave me a
pleasure too sweet to be resisted. To triumph over the widow, for whom
I had in a very short time contracted a most inveterate hatred, was a
pride not to be described. Hebbers appeared to me to be the cause of
all this happiness. I doubted not but that he had the most disinterested
passion for me, and thought him every way worthy of its return. I did
return it, and accepted him as my lover.

“He declared the greatest apprehensions of my father’s suspicion, though
I am convinced these were causeless had his designs been honourable. To
blind these, I consented that he should carry on sham addresses to the
widow, who was now a constant jest between us; and he pretended from
time to time to acquaint me faithfully with everything that past at his
interviews with her; nor was this faithless woman wanting in her part
of the deceit. She carried herself to me all the while with a shew of
affection, and pretended to have the utmost friendship for me But such
are the friendships of women!”

At this remark, Booth, though enough affected at some parts of the
story, had great difficulty to refrain from laughter; but, by good luck,
he escaped being perceived; and the lady went on without interruption.

“I am come now to a part of my narrative in which it is impossible to
be particular without being tedious; for, as to the commerce between
lovers, it is, I believe, much the same in all cases; and there is,
perhaps, scarce a single phrase that hath not been repeated ten millions
of times.

“One thing, however, as I strongly remarked it then, so I will repeat it
to you now. In all our conversations, in moments when he fell into the
warmest raptures, and exprest the greatest uneasiness at the delay
of his joys, he seldom mentioned the word marriage; and never once
solicited a day for that purpose. Indeed, women cannot be cautioned too
much against such lovers; for though I have heard, and perhaps truly, of
some of our sex, of a virtue so exalted, that it is proof against every
temptation; yet the generality, I am afraid, are too much in the power
of a man to whom they have owned an affection. What is called being upon
a good footing is, perhaps, being upon a very dangerous one; and a woman
who hath given her consent to marry can hardly be said to be safe till
she is married.

“And now, sir, I hasten to the period of my ruin. We had a wedding in
our family; my musical sister was married to a young fellow as musical
as herself. Such a match, you may be sure, amongst other festivities,
must have a ball. Oh! Mr. Booth, shall modesty forbid me to remark to
you what past on that occasion? But why do I mention modesty, who
have no pretensions to it? Everything was said and practised on that
occasion, as if the purpose had been to inflame the mind of every
woman present. That effect, I freely own to you, it had with me. Music,
dancing, wine, and the most luscious conversation, in which my poor dear
father innocently joined, raised ideas in me of which I shall for ever
repent; and I wished (why should I deny it?) that it had been my wedding
instead of my sister’s.

“The villain Hebbers danced with me that night, and he lost no
opportunity of improving the occasion. In short, the dreadful evening
came. My father, though it was a very unusual thing with him, grew
intoxicated with liquor; most of the men were in the same condition;
nay, I myself drank more than I was accustomed to, enough to inflame,
though not to disorder. I lost my former bed-fellow, my sister, and--you
may, I think, guess the rest--the villain found means to steal to my
chamber, and I was undone.

“Two months I passed in this detested commerce, buying, even then, my
guilty, half-tasted pleasures at too dear a rate, with continual horror
and apprehension; but what have I paid since--what do I pay now, Mr.
Booth? O may my fate be a warning to every woman to keep her innocence,
to resist every temptation, since she is certain to repent of the
foolish bargain. May it be a warning to her to deal with mankind with
care and caution; to shun the least approaches of dishonour, and never
to confide too much in the honesty of a man, nor in her own strength,
where she has so much at stake; let her remember she walks on a
precipice, and the bottomless pit is to receive her if she slips; nay,
if she makes but one false step.

“I ask your pardon, Mr. Booth; I might have spared these exhortations,
since no woman hears me; but you will not wonder at seeing me affected
on this occasion.”

Booth declared he was much more surprised at her being able so well to
preserve her temper in recounting her story.

“O sir,” answered she, “I am at length reconciled to my fate; and I can
now die with pleasure, since I die revenged. I am not one of those mean
wretches who can sit down and lament their misfortunes. If I ever shed
tears, they are the tears of indignation.--But I will proceed.

“It was my fate now to solicit marriage; and I failed not to do it in
the most earnest manner. He answered me at first with procrastinations,
declaring, from time to time, he would mention it to my father; and
still excusing himself for not doing it. At last he thought on an
expedient to obtain a longer reprieve. This was by pretending that he
should, in a very few weeks, be preferred to the command of a troop; and
then, he said, he could with some confidence propose the match.

“In this delay I was persuaded to acquiesce, and was indeed pretty easy,
for I had not yet the least mistrust of his honour; but what words can
paint my sensations, when one morning he came into my room, with all the
marks of dejection in his countenance, and, throwing an open letter on
the table, said, ‘There is news, madam, in that letter which I am unable
to tell you; nor can it give you more concern than it hath given me.’

“This letter was from his captain, to acquaint him that the rout, as
they call it, was arrived, and that they were to march within two days.
And this, I am since convinced, was what he expected, instead of the
preferment which had been made the pretence of delaying our marriage.

“The shock which I felt at reading this was inexpressible, occasioned
indeed principally by the departure of a villain whom I loved. However,
I soon acquired sufficient presence of mind to remember the main point;
and I now insisted peremptorily on his making me immediately his wife,
whatever might be the consequence.

“He seemed thunderstruck at this proposal, being, I suppose, destitute
of any excuse: but I was too impatient to wait for an answer, and cried
out with much eagerness, Sure you cannot hesitate a moment upon this
matter--‘Hesitate! madam!’ replied he--‘what you ask is impossible. Is
this a time for me to mention a thing of this kind to your father?’--My
eyes were now opened all at once--I fell into a rage little short of
madness. Tell not me, I cried, of impossibilities, nor times, nor of my
father---my honour, my reputation, my all are at stake.--I will have no
excuse, no delay--make me your wife this instant, or I will proclaim
you over the face of the whole earth for the greatest of villains. He
answered, with a kind of sneer, ‘What will you proclaim, madam?--whose
honour will you injure?’ My tongue faltered when I offered to reply,
and I fell into a violent agony, which ended in a fit; nor do I remember
anything more that past till I found myself in the arms of my poor
affrighted father.

“O, Mr. Booth, what was then my situation! I tremble even now from the
reflection.--I must stop a moment. I can go no farther.” Booth attempted
all in his power to soothe her; and she soon recovered her powers, and
proceeded in her story.



