
_The narrative continued. More of the touchstone._


Booth made a proper acknowledgment of Miss Matthew’s civility, and then
renewed his story. “We were upon the footing of lovers; and Amelia threw
off her reserve more and more, till at length I found all that return of
my affection which the tenderest lover can require.

“My situation would now have been a paradise, had not my happiness been
interrupted with the same reflections I have already mentioned; had I
not, in short, concluded, that I must derive all my joys from the almost
certain ruin of that dear creature to whom I should owe them.

“This thought haunted me night and day, till I at last grew unable to
support it: I therefore resolved in the strongest manner, to lay it
before Amelia.

“One evening then, after the highest professions of the most
disinterested love, in which Heaven knows my sincerity, I took an
occasion to speak to Amelia in the following manner:--

“Too true it is, I am afraid, my dearest creature, that the highest
human happiness is imperfect. How rich would be my cup, was it not for
one poisonous drop which embitters the whole! O, Amelia! what must be
the consequence of my ever having the honour to call you mine!--You know
my situation in life, and you know your own: I have nothing more than
the poor provision of an ensign’s commission to depend on; your sole
dependence is on your mother; should any act of disobedience defeat
your expectations, how wretched must your lot be with me! O, Amelia! how
ghastly an object to my mind is the apprehension of your distress! Can
I bear to reflect a moment on the certainty of your foregoing all the
conveniences of life? on the possibility of your suffering all its most
dreadful inconveniencies? what must be my misery, then, to see you in
such a situation, and to upbraid myself with being the accursed cause
of bringing you to it? Suppose too in such a season I should be summoned
from you. Could I submit to see you encounter all the hazards, the
fatigues of war, with me? you could not yourself, however willing,
support them a single campaign. What then; must I leave you to starve
alone, deprived of the tenderness of a husband, deprived too of the
tenderness of the best of mothers, through my means? a woman most
dear to me, for being the parent, the nurse, and the friend of my
Amelia.---But oh! my sweet creature, carry your thoughts a little
further. Think of the tenderest consequences, the dearest pledges of our
love. Can I bear to think of entailing beggary on the posterity of my
Amelia? on our---Oh, Heavens!--on our children!--On the other side,
is it possible even to mention the word--I will not, must not, cannot,
cannot part with you.---What must we do, Amelia? It is now I sincerely
ask your advice.”

“‘What advice can I give you,’ said she, ‘in such an alternative? Would
to Heaven we had never met!’

“These words were accompanied with a sigh, and a look inexpressibly
tender, the tears at the same time overflowing all her lovely cheeks. I
was endeavouring to reply when I was interrupted by what soon put an end
to the scene.

“Our amour had already been buzzed all over the town; and it came at
last to the ears of Mrs. Harris: I had, indeed, observed of late a great
alteration in that lady’s behaviour towards me whenever I visited at the
house; nor could I, for a long time before this evening, ever obtain
a private interview with Amelia; and now, it seems, I owed it to her
mother’s intention of overhearing all that passed between us.

“At the period then above mentioned, Mrs. Harris burst from the closet
where she had hid herself, and surprised her daughter, reclining on
my bosom in all that tender sorrow I have just described. I will not
attempt to paint the rage of the mother, or the daughter’s confusion,
or my own. ‘Here are very fine doings, indeed,’ cries Mrs. Harris: ‘you
have made a noble use, Amelia, of my indulgence, and the trust I reposed
in you.--As for you, Mr. Booth, I will not accuse you; you have used
my child as I ought to have expected; I may thank myself for what hath
happened;’ with much more of the same kind, before she would suffer me
to speak; but at last I obtained a hearing, and offered to excuse my
poor Amelia, who was ready to sink into the earth under the oppression
of grief, by taking as much blame as I could on myself. Mrs. Harris
answered, ‘No, sir, I must say you are innocent in comparison of her;
nay, I can say I have heard you use dissuasive arguments; and I promise
you they are of weight. I have, I thank Heaven, one dutiful child, and
I shall henceforth think her my only one.’--She then forced the poor,
trembling, fainting Amelia out of the room; which when she had done, she
began very coolly to reason with me on the folly, as well as iniquity,
which I had been guilty of; and repeated to me almost every word I had
before urged to her daughter. In fine, she at last obtained of me a
promise that I would soon go to my regiment, and submit to any misery
rather than that of being the ruin of Amelia.

“I now, for many days, endured the greatest torments which the human
mind is, I believe, capable of feeling; and I can honestly say I tried
all the means, and applied every argument which I could raise, to cure
me of my love. And to make these the more effectual, I spent every night
in walking backwards and forwards in the sight of Mrs. Harris’s house,
where I never failed to find some object or other which raised some
tender idea of my lovely Amelia, and almost drove me to distraction.”

“And don’t you think, sir,” said Miss Matthews, “you took a most
preposterous method to cure yourself?”

“Alas, madam,” answered he, “you cannot see it in a more absurd light
than I do; but those know little of real love or grief who do not know
how much we deceive ourselves when we pretend to aim at the cure of
either. It is with these, as it is with some distempers of the body,
nothing is in the least agreeable to us but what serves to heighten the
disease.

“At the end of a fortnight, when I was driven almost to the highest
degree of despair, and could contrive no method of conveying a letter
to Amelia, how was I surprised when Mrs. Harris’s servant brought me
a card, with an invitation from the mother herself to drink tea that
evening at her house!

“You will easily believe, madam, that I did not fail so agreeable an
appointment: on my arrival I was introduced into a large company of men
and women, Mrs. Harris and my Amelia being part of the company.

“Amelia seemed in my eyes to look more beautiful than ever, and behaved
with all the gaiety imaginable. The old lady treated me with much
civility, but the young lady took little notice of me, and addressed
most of her discourse to another gentleman present. Indeed, she now and
then gave me a look of no discouraging kind, and I observed her colour
change more than once when her eyes met mine; circumstances, which,
perhaps, ought to have afforded me sufficient comfort, but they could
not allay the thousand doubts and fears with which I was alarmed, for my
anxious thoughts suggested no less to me than that Amelia had made her
peace with her mother at the price of abandoning me forever, and of
giving her ear to some other lover. All my prudence now vanished at
once; and I would that instant have gladly run away with Amelia, and
have married her without the least consideration of any consequences.

“With such thoughts I had tormented myself for near two hours, till most
of the company had taken their leave. This I was myself incapable of
doing, nor do I know when I should have put an end to my visit, had not
Dr Harrison taken me away almost by force, telling me in a whisper
that he had something to say to me of great consequence.--You know the
doctor, madam--”

“Very well, sir,” answered Miss Matthews, “and one of the best men in
the world he is, and an honour to the sacred order to which he belongs.”

“You will judge,” replied Booth, “by the sequel, whether I have reason
to think him so.”--He then proceeded as in the next chapter.



