
_The story of Mr. Booth continued. In this chapter the reader will
perceive a glimpse of the character of a very good divine, with some
matters of a very tender kind._


“The doctor conducted me into his study, and I then, desiring me to sit
down, began, as near as I can remember, in these words, or at least to
this purpose:

“‘You cannot imagine, young gentleman, that your love for Miss Emily is
any secret in this place; I have known it some time, and have been, I
assure you, very much your enemy in this affair.’

“I answered, that I was very much obliged to him.

“‘Why, so you are,’ replied he; ‘and so, perhaps, you will think
yourself when you know all.--I went about a fortnight ago to Mrs.
Harris, to acquaint her with my apprehensions on her daughter’s account;
for, though the matter was much talked of, I thought it might possibly
not have reached her ears. I will be very plain with you. I advised her
to take all possible care of the young lady, and even to send her to
some place, where she might be effectually kept out of your reach while
you remained in the town.’

“And do you think, sir, said I, that this was acting a kind part by me?
or do you expect that I should thank you on this occasion?

“‘Young man,’ answered he, ‘I did not intend you any kindness, nor do
I desire any of your thanks. My intention was to preserve a worthy lady
from a young fellow of whom I had heard no good character, and whom I
imagined to have a design of stealing a human creature for the sake of
her fortune.’

“It was very kind of you, indeed, answered I, to entertain such an
opinion of me.

“‘Why, sir,’ replied the doctor, ‘it is the opinion which, I believe,
most of you young gentlemen of the order of the rag deserve. I have
known some instances, and have heard of more, where such young fellows
have committed robbery under the name of marriage.’

“I was going to interrupt him with some anger when he desired me to have
a little patience, and then informed me that he had visited Mrs. Harris
with the above-mentioned design the evening after the discovery I have
related; that Mrs. Harris, without waiting for his information, had
recounted to him all which had happened the evening before; and, indeed,
she must have an excellent memory, for I think she repeated every word
I said, and added, that she had confined her daughter to her chamber,
where she kept her a close prisoner, and had not seen her since.

“I cannot express, nor would modesty suffer me if I could, all that now
past. The doctor took me by the hand and burst forth into the warmest
commendations of the sense and generosity which he was pleased to say
discovered themselves in my speech. You know, madam, his strong and
singular way of expressing himself on all occasions, especially when he
is affected with anything. ‘Sir,’ said he, ‘if I knew half a dozen such
instances in the army, the painter should put red liveries upon all the
saints in my closet.’

“From this instant, the doctor told me, he had become my friend and
zealous advocate with Mrs. Harris, on whom he had at last prevailed,
though not without the greatest difficulty, to consent to my marrying
Amelia, upon condition that I settled every penny which the mother
should lay down, and that she would retain a certain sum in her hands
which she would at any time deposit for my advancement in the army.

“You will, I hope, madam, conceive that I made no hesitation at these
conditions, nor need I mention the joy which I felt on this occasion, or
the acknowledgment I paid the doctor, who is, indeed, as you say, one of
the best of men.

“The next morning I had permission to visit Amelia, who received me in
such a manner, that I now concluded my happiness to be complete.

“Everything was now agreed on all sides, and lawyers employed to prepare
the writings, when an unexpected cloud arose suddenly in our serene sky,
and all our joys were obscured in a moment.

“When matters were, as I apprehended, drawing near a conclusion, I
received an express, that a sister whom I tenderly loved was seized with
a violent fever, and earnestly desired me to come to her. I immediately
obeyed the summons, and, as it was then about two in the morning,
without staying even to take leave of Amelia, for whom I left a short
billet, acquainting her with the reason of my absence.

“The gentleman’s house where my sister then was stood at fifty miles’
distance, and, though I used the utmost expedition, the unmerciful
distemper had, before my arrival, entirely deprived the poor girl of her
senses, as it soon after did of her life.

“Not all the love I bore Amelia, nor the tumultuous delight with which
the approaching hour of possessing her filled my heart, could, for a
while, allay my grief at the loss of my beloved Nancy. Upon my soul, I
cannot yet mention her name without tears. Never brother and sister had,
I believe, a higher friendship for each other. Poor dear girl! whilst
I sat by her in her light-head fits, she repeated scarce any other
name but mine; and it plainly appeared that, when her dear reason was
ravished away from her, it had left my image on her fancy, and that
the last use she made of it was to think on me. ‘Send for my dear Billy
immediately,’ she cried; ‘I know he will come to me in a moment. Will
nobody fetch him to me? pray don’t kill me before I see him once more.
You durst not use me so if he was here.’--Every accent still rings in
my ears. Oh, heavens! to hear this, and at the same time to see the
poor delirious creature deriving the greatest horrors from my sight, and
mistaking me for a highwayman who had a little before robbed her. But
I ask your pardon; the sensations I felt are to be known only from
experience, and to you must appear dull and insipid. At last, she seemed
for a moment to know me, and cried, ‘O heavens! my dearest brother!’
upon which she fell into immediate convulsions, and died away in my
arms.”

Here Mr. Booth stopped a moment, and wiped his eyes; and Miss Matthews,
perhaps out of complaisance, wiped hers.



