
_Containing strange revolutions of fortune_


Booth proceeded thus:

“This loss, perhaps, madam, you will think had made me miserable enough;
but Fortune did not think so; for, on the day when my Nancy was to be
buried, a courier arrived from Dr Harrison, with a letter, in which
the doctor acquainted me that he was just come from Mrs. Harris when
he despatched the express, and earnestly desired me to return the very
instant I received his letter, as I valued my Amelia. ‘Though if the
daughter,’ added he, ‘should take after her mother (as most of them do)
it will be, perhaps, wiser in you to stay away.’

“I presently sent for the messenger into my room, and with much
difficulty extorted from him that a great squire in his coach and six
was come to Mrs. Harris’s, and that the whole town said he was shortly
to be married to Amelia.

“I now soon perceived how much superior my love for Amelia was to every
other passion; poor Nancy’s idea disappeared in a moment; I quitted the
dear lifeless corpse, over which I had shed a thousand tears, left the
care of her funeral to others, and posted, I may almost say flew, back
to Amelia, and alighted at the doctor’s house, as he had desired me in
his letter.

“The good man presently acquainted me with what had happened in my
absence. Mr. Winckworth had, it seems, arrived the very day of my
departure, with a grand equipage, and, without delay, had made formal
proposals to Mrs. Harris, offering to settle any part of his vast
estate, in whatever manner she pleased, on Amelia. These proposals the
old lady had, without any deliberation, accepted, and had insisted, in
the most violent manner, on her daughter’s compliance, which Amelia had
as peremptorily refused to give; insisting, on her part, on the consent
which her mother had before given to our marriage, in which she was
heartily seconded by the doctor, who declared to her, as he now did
to me, ‘that we ought as much to be esteemed man and wife as if the
ceremony had already past between us.’

“These remonstrances, the doctor told me, had worked no effect on Mrs.
Harris, who still persisted in her avowed resolution of marrying her
daughter to Winckworth, whom the doctor had likewise attacked, telling
him that he was paying his addresses to another man’s wife; but all to
no purpose; the young gentleman was too much in love to hearken to any
dissuasives.

“We now entered into a consultation what means to employ. The doctor
earnestly protested against any violence to be offered to the person of
Winckworth, which, I believe, I had rashly threatened; declaring that,
if I made any attempt of that kind, he would for ever abandon my cause.
I made him a solemn promise of forbearance. At last he determined to pay
another visit to Mrs. Harris, and, if he found her obdurate, he said
he thought himself at liberty to join us together without any further
consent of the mother, which every parent, he said, had a right to
refuse, but not retract when given, unless the party himself, by some
conduct of his, gave a reason.

“The doctor having made his visit with no better success than before,
the matter now debated was, how to get possession of Amelia by
stratagem, for she was now a closer prisoner than ever; was her mother’s
bedfellow by night, and never out of her sight by day.

“While we were deliberating on this point a wine-merchant of the town
came to visit the doctor, to inform him that he had just bottled off
a hogshead of excellent old port, of which he offered to spare him a
hamper, saying that he was that day to send in twelve dozen to Mrs.
Harris.

“The doctor now smiled at a conceit which came into his head; and,
taking me aside, asked me if I had love enough for the young lady to
venture into the house in a hamper. I joyfully leapt at the proposal,
to which the merchant, at the doctor’s intercession, consented; for I
believe, madam, you know the great authority which that worthy mart
had over the whole town. The doctor, moreover, promised to procure a
license, and to perform the office for us at his house, if I could find
any means of conveying Amelia thither.

“In this hamper, then, I was carried to the house, and deposited in the
entry, where I had not lain long before I was again removed and packed
up in a cart in order to be sent five miles into the country; for I
heard the orders given as I lay in the entry; and there I likewise heard
that Amelia and her mother were to follow me the next morning.

“I was unloaded from my cart, and set down with the rest of the lumber
in a great hall. Here I remained above three hours, impatiently waiting
for the evening, when I determined to quit a posture which was become
very uneasy, and break my prison; but Fortune contrived to release me
sooner, by the following means: The house where I now was had been left
in the care of one maid-servant. This faithful creature came into the
hall with the footman who had driven the cart. A scene of the highest
fondness having past between them, the fellow proposed, and the maid
consented, to open the hamper and drink a bottle together, which,
they agreed, their mistress would hardly miss in such a quantity. They
presently began to execute their purpose. They opened the hamper, and,
to their great surprise, discovered the contents.

“I took an immediate advantage of the consternation which appeared in
the countenances of both the servants, and had sufficient presence of
mind to improve the knowledge of those secrets to which I was privy.
I told them that it entirely depended on their behaviour to me whether
their mistress should ever be acquainted, either with what they had done
or with what they had intended to do; for that if they would keep my
secret I would reciprocally keep theirs. I then acquainted them with
my purpose of lying concealed in the house, in order to watch an
opportunity of obtaining a private interview with Amelia.

[Illustration: They opened The Hamper]

“In the situation in which these two delinquents stood, you may be
assured it was not difficult for me to seal up their lips. In short,
they agreed to whatever I proposed. I lay that evening in my dear
Amelia’s bedchamber, and was in the morning conveyed into an old
lumber-garret, where I was to wait till Amelia (whom the maid promised,
on her arrival, to inform of my place of concealment) could find some
opportunity of seeing me.”

“I ask pardon for interrupting you,” cries Miss Matthews, “but you bring
to my remembrance a foolish story which I heard at that time, though at
a great distance from you: That an officer had, in confederacy with Miss
Harris, broke open her mother’s cellar and stole away a great quantity
of her wine. I mention it only to shew you what sort of foundations most
stories have.”

Booth told her he had heard some such thing himself, and then continued
his story as in the next chapter.



