
_The story of Booth continued.--More surprising adventures._


“From what trifles, dear Miss Matthews,” cried Booth, “may some of our
greatest distresses arise!” Do you not perceive I am going to tell you we
had neither pen, ink, nor paper, in our present exigency?

A verbal message was now our only resource; however, we contrived to
deliver it in such terms, that neither nurse nor her son could possibly
conceive any suspicion from it of the present situation of our affairs.
Indeed, Amelia whispered me, I might safely place any degree of
confidence in the lad; for he had been her foster-brother, and she had
a great opinion of his integrity. He was in truth a boy of very good
natural parts; and Dr Harrison, who had received him into his family,
at Amelia’s recommendation, had bred him up to write and read very well,
and had taken some pains to infuse into him the principles of honesty
and religion. He was not, indeed, even now discharged from the doctor’s
service, but had been at home with his mother for some time, on account
of the small-pox, from which he was lately recovered.

“I have said so much,” continued Booth, “of the boy’s character, that
you may not be surprised at some stories which I shall tell you of him
hereafter.

“I am going now, madam, to relate to you one of those strange accidents
which are produced by such a train of circumstances, that mere chance
hath been thought incapable of bringing them together; and which have
therefore given birth, in superstitious minds, to Fortune, and to
several other imaginary beings.

“We were now impatiently expecting the arrival of the doctor; our
messenger had been gone much more than a sufficient time, which to us,
you may be assured, appeared not at all shorter than it was, when nurse,
who had gone out of doors on some errand, came running hastily to us,
crying out, ‘O my dear young madam, her ladyship’s coach is just at the
door!’ Amelia turned pale as death at these words; indeed, I feared she
would have fainted, if I could be said to fear, who had scarce any of my
senses left, and was in a condition little better than my angel’s.

“While we were both in this dreadful situation, Amelia fallen back in
her chair with the countenance in which ghosts are painted, myself
at her feet, with a complexion of no very different colour, and nurse
screaming out and throwing water in Amelia’s face, Mrs. Harris entered
the room. At the sight of this scene she threw herself likewise into a
chair, and called immediately for a glass of water, which Miss Betty
her daughter supplied her with; for, as to nurse, nothing was capable of
making any impression on her whilst she apprehended her young mistress
to be in danger.

“The doctor had now entered the room, and, coming immediately up to
Amelia, after some expressions of surprize, he took her by the hand,
called her his little sugar-plum, and assured her there were none but
friends present. He then led her tottering across the room to Mrs.
Harris. Amelia then fell upon her knees before her mother; but the
doctor caught her up, saying, ‘Use that posture, child, only to the
Almighty!’ but I need not mention this singularity of his to you
who know him so well, and must have heard him often dispute against
addressing ourselves to man in the humblest posture which we use towards
the Supreme Being.

“I will tire you with no more particulars: we were soon satisfied that
the doctor had reconciled us and our affairs to Mrs. Harris; and we
now proceeded directly to church, the doctor having before provided a
licence for us.”

“But where is the strange accident?” cries Miss Matthews; “sure you have
raised more curiosity than you have satisfied.”

“Indeed, madam,” answered he, “your reproof is just; I had like to
have forgotten it; but you cannot wonder at me when you reflect on that
interesting part of my story which I am now relating.--But before I
mention this accident I must tell you what happened after Amelia’s
escape from her mother’s house. Mrs. Harris at first ran out into the
lane among her servants, and pursued us (so she imagined) along the road
leading to the town; but that being very dirty, and a violent storm of
rain coming, she took shelter in an alehouse about half a mile from her
own house, whither she sent for her coach; she then drove, together with
her daughter, to town, where, soon after her arrival, she sent for the
doctor, her usual privy counsellor in all her affairs. They sat up all
night together, the doctor endeavouring, by arguments and persuasions,
to bring Mrs. Harris to reason; but all to no purpose, though, as he
hath informed me, Miss Betty seconded him with the warmest entreaties.”

Here Miss Matthews laughed; of which Booth begged to know the reason:
she, at last, after many apologies, said, “It was the first good thing
she ever heard of Miss Betty; nay,” said she, “and asking your pardon
for my opinion of your sister, since you will have it, I always
conceived her to be the deepest of hypocrites.”

Booth fetched a sigh, and said he was afraid she had not always acted so
kindly;--and then, after a little hesitation, proceeded:

“You will be pleased, madam, to remember the lad was sent with a verbal
message to the doctor: which message was no more than to acquaint him
where we were, and to desire the favour of his company, or that he would
send a coach to bring us to whatever place he would please to meet us
at. This message was to be delivered to the doctor himself, and the
messenger was ordered, if he found him not at home, to go to him
wherever he was. He fulfilled his orders and told it to the doctor in
the presence of Mrs. Harris.”

“Oh, the idiot!” cries Miss Matthews. “Not at all,” answered Booth: “he
is a very sensible fellow, as you will, perhaps, say hereafter. He had
not the least reason to suspect that any secrecy was necessary; for
we took the utmost care he should not suspect it.--Well, madam, this
accident, which appeared so unfortunate, turned in the highest degree
to our advantage. Mrs. Harris no sooner heard the message delivered
than she fell into the most violent passion imaginable, and accused the
doctor of being in the plot, and of having confederated with me in the
design of carrying off her daughter.

“The doctor, who had hitherto used only soothing methods, now talked
in a different strain. He confessed the accusation and justified his
conduct. He said he was no meddler in the family affairs of others, nor
should he have concerned himself with hers, but at her own request; but
that, since Mrs. Harris herself had made him an agent in this matter, he
would take care to acquit himself with honour, and above all things to
preserve a young lady for whom he had the highest esteem; ‘for she is,’
cries he, and, by heavens, he said true, ‘the most worthy, generous,
and noble of all human beings. You have yourself, madam,’ said he,
‘consented to the match. I have, at your request, made the match;’ and
then he added some particulars relating to his opinion of me, which
my modesty forbids me to repeat.”--“Nay, but,” cries Miss Matthews, “I
insist on your conquest of that modesty for once. We women do not love
to hear one another’s praises, and I will be made amends by hearing the
praises of a man, and of a man whom, perhaps,” added she with a leer, “I
shall not think much the better of upon that account.”--“In obedience
to your commands, then, madam,” continued he, “the doctor was so kind
to say he had enquired into my character and found that I had been a
dutiful son and an affectionate brother. Relations, said he, in which
whoever discharges his duty well, gives us a well-grounded hope that he
will behave as properly in all the rest. He concluded with saying
that Amelia’s happiness, her heart, nay, her very reputation, were all
concerned in this matter, to which, as he had been made instrumental, he
was resolved to carry her through it; and then, taking the licence from
his pocket, declared to Mrs. Harris that he would go that instant and
marry her daughter wherever he found her. This speech, the doctor’s
voice, his look, and his behaviour, all which are sufficiently
calculated to inspire awe, and even terror, when he pleases, frightened
poor Mrs. Harris, and wrought a more sensible effect than it was in his
power to produce by all his arguments and entreaties; and I have already
related what followed.

“Thus the strange accident of our wanting pen, ink, and paper, and our
not trusting the boy with our secret, occasioned the discovery to Mrs.
Harris; that discovery put the doctor upon his metal, and produced that
blessed event which I have recounted to you, and which, as my mother
hath since confessed, nothing but the spirit which he had exerted after
the discovery could have brought about.

“Well, madam, you now see me married to Amelia; in which situation you
will, perhaps, think my happiness incapable of addition. Perhaps it was
so; and yet I can with truth say that the love which I then bore Amelia
was not comparable to what I bear her now.” “Happy Amelia!” cried Miss
Matthews. “If all men were like you, all women would be blessed; nay,
the whole world would be so in a great measure; for, upon my soul, I
believe that from the damned inconstancy of your sex to ours proceeds
half the miseries of mankind.”

That we may give the reader leisure to consider well the foregoing
sentiment, we will here put an end to this chapter.



