
_In which Mr. Booth sets forward on his journey._


“Well, madam, we have now taken our leave of Amelia. I rode a full mile
before I once suffered myself to look back; but now being come to
the top of a little hill, the last spot I knew which could give me a
prospect of Mrs. Harris’s house, my resolution failed: I stopped and
cast my eyes backward. Shall I tell you what I felt at that instant? I
do assure you I am not able. So many tender ideas crowded at once into
my mind, that, if I may use the expression, they almost dissolved my
heart. And now, madam, the most unfortunate accident came first into
my head. This was, that I had in the hurry and confusion left the dear
casket behind me. The thought of going back at first suggested itself;
but the consequences of that were too apparent. I therefore resolved
to send my man, and in the meantime to ride on softly on my road. He
immediately executed my orders, and after some time, feeding my eyes
with that delicious and yet heartfelt prospect, I at last turned my
horse to descend the hill, and proceeded about a hundred yards,
when, considering with myself that I should lose no time by a second
indulgence, I again turned back, and once more feasted my sight with the
same painful pleasure till my man returned, bringing me the casket, and
an account that Amelia still continued in the sweet sleep I left her.
I now suddenly turned my horse for the last time, and with the utmost
resolution pursued my journey.

“I perceived my man at his return--But before I mention anything of
him it may be proper, madam, to acquaint you who he was. He was the
foster-brother of my Amelia. This young fellow had taken it into his
head to go into the army; and he was desirous to serve under my command.
The doctor consented to discharge him; his mother at last yielded to
his importunities, and I was very easily prevailed on to list one of the
handsomest young fellows in England.

“You will easily believe I had some little partiality to one whose milk
Amelia had sucked; but, as he had never seen the regiment, I had no
opportunity to shew him any great mark of favour. Indeed he waited on
me as my servant; and I treated him with all the tenderness which can be
used to one in that station.

“When I was about to change into the horse-guards the poor fellow began
to droop, fearing that he should no longer be in the same corps with
me, though certainly that would not have been the case. However, he had
never mentioned one word of his dissatisfaction. He is indeed a fellow
of a noble spirit; but when he heard that I was to remain where I was,
and that we were to go to Gibraltar together, he fell into transports
of joy little short of madness. In short, the poor fellow had imbibed
a very strong affection for me; though this was what I knew nothing of
till long after.

“When he returned to me then, as I was saying, with the casket, I
observed his eyes all over blubbered with tears. I rebuked him a little
too rashly on this occasion. ‘Heyday!’ says I, ‘what is the meaning of
this? I hope I have not a milk-sop with me. If I thought you would shew
such a face to the enemy I would leave you behind.’--‘Your honour need
not fear that,’ answered he; ‘I shall find nobody there that I shall
love well enough to make me cry.’ I was highly pleased with this answer,
in which I thought I could discover both sense and spirit. I then asked
him what had occasioned those tears since he had left me (for he had no
sign of any at that time), and whether he had seen his mother at Mrs.
Harris’s? He answered in the negative, and begged that I would ask him
no more questions; adding that he was not very apt to cry, and he hoped
he should never give me such another opportunity of blaming him. I
mention this only as an instance of his affection towards me; for I
never could account for those tears any otherwise than by placing them
to the account of that distress in which he left me at that time. We
travelled full forty miles that day without baiting, when, arriving at
the inn where I intended to rest that night, I retired immediately to
my chamber, with my dear Amelia’s casket, the opening of which was the
nicest repast, and to which every other hunger gave way.

“It is impossible to mention to you all the little matters with which
Amelia had furnished this casket. It contained medicines of all kinds,
which her mother, who was the Lady Bountiful of that country, had
supplied her with. The most valuable of all to me was a lock of her dear
hair, which I have from that time to this worn in my bosom. What would
I have then given for a little picture of my dear angel, which she had
lost from her chamber about a month before! and which we had the highest
reason in the world to imagine her sister had taken away; for the
suspicion lay only between her and Amelia’s maid, who was of all
creatures the honestest, and whom her mistress had often trusted with
things of much greater value; for the picture, which was set in gold,
and had two or three little diamonds round it, was worth about twelve
guineas only; whereas Amelia left jewels in her care of much greater
value.”

“Sure,” cries Miss Matthews, “she could not be such a paultry pilferer.”

“Not on account of the gold or the jewels,” cries Booth. “We imputed it
to mere spite, with which, I assure you, she abounds; and she knew that,
next to Amelia herself, there was nothing which I valued so much as this
little picture; for such a resemblance did it bear of the original, that
Hogarth himself did never, I believe, draw a stronger likeness. Spite,
therefore, was the only motive to this cruel depredation; and indeed her
behaviour on the occasion sufficiently convinced us both of the justice
of our suspicion, though we neither of us durst accuse her; and she
herself had the assurance to insist very strongly (though she could not
prevail) with Amelia to turn away her innocent maid, saying, she would
not live in the house with a thief.”

Miss Matthews now discharged some curses on Miss Betty, not much worth
repeating, and then Mr. Booth proceeded in his relation.



