
_A sea piece._


“The next day we joined the regiment, which was soon after to embark.
Nothing but mirth and jollity were in the countenance of every officer
and soldier; and as I now met several friends whom I had not seen
for above a year before, I passed several happy hours, in which poor
Amelia’s image seldom obtruded itself to interrupt my pleasure. To
confess the truth, dear Miss Matthews, the tenderest of passions
is capable of subsiding; nor is absence from our dearest friends so
unsupportable as it may at first appear. Distance of time and place do
really cure what they seem to aggravate; and taking leave of our friends
resembles taking leave of the world; concerning which it hath been often
said that it is not death, but dying, which is terrible.”--Here Miss
Matthews burst into a fit of laughter, and cried, “I sincerely ask your
pardon; but I cannot help laughing at the gravity of your philosophy.”
 Booth answered, That the doctrine of the passions had been always his
favourite study; that he was convinced every man acted entirely from
that passion which was uppermost. “Can I then think,” said he, “without
entertaining the utmost contempt for myself, that any pleasure upon
earth could drive the thoughts of Amelia one instant from my mind?

“At length we embarked aboard a transport, and sailed for Gibraltar; but
the wind, which was at first fair, soon chopped about; so that we were
obliged, for several days, to beat to windward, as the sea phrase is.
During this time the taste which I had of a seafaring life did not
appear extremely agreeable. We rolled up and down in a little narrow
cabbin, in which were three officers, all of us extremely sea-sick; our
sickness being much aggravated by the motion of the ship, by the view
of each other, and by the stench of the men. But this was but a little
taste indeed of the misery which was to follow; for we were got about
six leagues to the westward of Scilly, when a violent storm arose at
north-east, which soon raised the waves to the height of mountains. The
horror of this is not to be adequately described to those who have
never seen the like. The storm began in the evening, and, as the clouds
brought on the night apace, it was soon entirely dark; nor had we,
during many hours, any other light than what was caused by the jarring
elements, which frequently sent forth flashes, or rather streams of
fire; and whilst these presented the most dreadful objects to our eyes,
the roaring of the winds, the dashing of the waves against the ship and
each other, formed a sound altogether as horrible for our ears; while
our ship, sometimes lifted up, as it were, to the skies, and sometimes
swept away at once as into the lowest abyss, seemed to be the sport of
the winds and seas. The captain himself almost gave up all for lost,
and exprest his apprehension of being inevitably cast on the rocks of
Scilly, and beat to pieces. And now, while some on board were addressing
themselves to the Supreme Being, and others applying for comfort to
strong liquors, my whole thoughts were entirely engaged by my Amelia. A
thousand tender ideas crouded into my mind. I can truly say that I had
not a single consideration about myself in which she was not concerned.
Dying to me was leaving her; and the fear of never seeing her more was a
dagger stuck in my heart. Again, all the terrors with which this storm,
if it reached her ears, must fill her gentle mind on my account, and the
agonies which she must undergo when she heard of my fate, gave me such
intolerable pangs, that I now repented my resolution, and wished, I own
I wished, that I had taken her advice, and preferred love and a cottage
to all the dazzling charms of honour.

“While I was tormenting myself with those meditations, and had concluded
myself as certainly lost, the master came into the cabbin, and with a
chearful voice assured us that we had escaped the danger, and that we
had certainly past to westward of the rock. This was comfortable news to
all present; and my captain, who had been some time on his knees, leapt
suddenly up, and testified his joy with a great oath.

“A person unused to the sea would have been astonished at the
satisfaction which now discovered itself in the master or in any on
board; for the storm still raged with great violence, and the daylight,
which now appeared, presented us with sights of horror sufficient to
terrify minds which were not absolute slaves to the passion of fear; but
so great is the force of habit, that what inspires a landsman with the
highest apprehension of danger gives not the least concern to a sailor,
to whom rocks and quicksands are almost the only objects of terror.

“The master, however, was a little mistaken in the present instance; for
he had not left the cabbin above an hour before my man came running to
me, and acquainted me that the ship was half full of water; that the
sailors were going to hoist out the boat and save themselves, and begged
me to come that moment along with him, as I tendered my preservation.
With this account, which was conveyed to me in a whisper, I acquainted
both the captain and ensign; and we all together immediately mounted
the deck, where we found the master making use of all his oratory to
persuade the sailors that the ship was in no danger; and at the same
time employing all his authority to set the pumps a-going, which he
assured them would keep the water under, and save his dear Lovely Peggy
(for that was the name of the ship), which he swore he loved as dearly
as his own soul.

“Indeed this sufficiently appeared; for the leak was so great, and the
water flowed in so plentifully, that his Lovely Peggy was half filled
before he could be brought to think of quitting her; but now the boat
was brought alongside the ship, and the master himself, notwithstanding
all his love for her, quitted his ship, and leapt into the boat. Every
man present attempted to follow his example, when I heard the voice of
my servant roaring forth my name in a kind of agony. I made directly to
the ship-side, but was too late; for the boat, being already overladen,
put directly off. And now, madam, I am going to relate to you an
instance of heroic affection in a poor fellow towards his master, to
which love itself, even among persons of superior education, can produce
but few similar instances. My poor man, being unable to get me with him
into the boat, leapt suddenly into the sea, and swam back to the ship;
and, when I gently rebuked him for his rashness, he answered, he chose
rather to die with me than to live to carry the account of my death to
my Amelia: at the same time bursting into a flood of tears, he cried,
‘Good Heavens! what will that poor lady feel when she hears of this!’
This tender concern for my dear love endeared the poor fellow more to
me than the gallant instance which he had just before given of his
affection towards myself.

“And now, madam, my eyes were shocked with a sight, the horror of which
can scarce be imagined; for the boat had scarce got four hundred yards
from the ship when it was swallowed up by the merciless waves, which now
ran so high, that out of the number of persons which were in the boat
none recovered the ship, though many of them we saw miserably perish
before our eyes, some of them very near us, without any possibility of
giving them the least assistance.

“But, whatever we felt for them, we felt, I believe, more for ourselves,
expecting every minute when we should share the same fate. Amongst the
rest, one of our officers appeared quite stupified with fear. I never,
indeed, saw a more miserable example of the great power of that passion:
I must not, however, omit doing him justice, by saying that I afterwards
saw the same man behave well in an engagement, in which he was wounded;
though there likewise he was said to have betrayed the same passion of
fear in his countenance.

“The other of our officers was no less stupified (if I may so express
myself) with fool-hardiness, and seemed almost insensible of his danger.
To say the truth, I have, from this and some other instances which I
have seen, been almost inclined to think that the courage as well as
cowardice of fools proceeds from not knowing what is or what is not the
proper object of fear; indeed, we may account for the extreme hardiness
of some men in the same manner as for the terrors of children at a
bugbear. The child knows not but that the bugbear is the proper object
of fear, the blockhead knows not that a cannon-ball is so.

“As to the remaining part of the ship’s crew and the soldiery, most of
them were dead drunk, and the rest were endeavouring, as fast as they
could, to prepare for death in the same manner.

“In this dreadful situation we were taught that no human condition
should inspire men with absolute despair; for, as the storm had ceased
for some time, the swelling of the sea began considerably to abate; and
we now perceived the man of war which convoyed us, at no great distance
astern. Those aboard her easily perceived our distress, and made
towards us. When they came pretty near they hoisted out two boats to
our assistance. These no sooner approached the ship than they were
instantaneously filled, and I myself got a place in one of them,
chiefly by the aid of my honest servant, of whose fidelity to me on all
occasions I cannot speak or think too highly. Indeed, I got into the
boat so much the more easily, as a great number on board the ship were
rendered, by drink, incapable of taking any care for themselves. There
was time, however, for the boat to pass and repass; so that, when we
came to call over names, three only, of all that remained in the ship
after the loss of her own boat, were missing.

“The captain, ensign, and myself, were received with many
congratulations by our officers on board the man of war.--The
sea-officers too, all except the captain, paid us their compliments,
though these were of the rougher kind, and not without several jokes on
our escape. As for the captain himself, we scarce saw him during many
hours; and, when he appeared, he presented a view of majesty beyond any
that I had ever seen. The dignity which he preserved did indeed give
me rather the idea of a Mogul, or a Turkish emperor, than of any of the
monarchs of Christendom. To say the truth, I could resemble his walk on
the deck to nothing but the image of Captain Gulliver strutting among
the Lilliputians; he seemed to think himself a being of an order
superior to all around him, and more especially to us of the land
service. Nay, such was the behaviour of all the sea-officers and sailors
to us and our soldiers, that, instead of appearing to be subjects of the
same prince, engaged in one quarrel, and joined to support one cause, we
land-men rather seemed to be captives on board an enemy’s vessel. This
is a grievous misfortune, and often proves so fatal to the service, that
it is great pity some means could not be found of curing it.”

Here Mr. Booth stopt a while to take breath. We will therefore give the
same refreshment to the reader.



