
_The captain, continuing his story, recounts some particulars which, we
doubt not, to many good people, will appear unnatural._


I was scarce sooner recovered from my indisposition than Amelia herself
fell ill. This, I am afraid, was occasioned by the fatigues which I
could not prevent her from undergoing on my account; for, as my disease
went off with violent sweats, during which the surgeon strictly ordered
that I should lie by myself, my Amelia could not be prevailed upon
to spend many hours in her own bed. During my restless fits she would
sometimes read to me several hours together; indeed it was not without
difficulty that she ever quitted my bedside. These fatigues, added to
the uneasiness of her mind, overpowered her weak spirits, and threw
her into one of the worst disorders that can possibly attend a woman;
a disorder very common among the ladies, and our physicians have not
agreed upon its name. Some call it fever on the spirits, some a nervous
fever, some the vapours, and some the hysterics.

“O say no more,” cries Miss Matthews; “I pity you, I pity you from my
soul. A man had better be plagued with all the curses of Egypt than with
a vapourish wife.”

“Pity me! madam,” answered Booth; “pity rather that dear creature who,
from her love and care of my unworthy self, contracted a distemper, the
horrors of which are scarce to be imagined. It is, indeed, a sort of
complication of all diseases together, with almost madness added to
them. In this situation, the siege being at an end, the governor gave me
leave to attend my wife to Montpelier, the air of which was judged to
be most likely to restore her to health. Upon this occasion she wrote
to her mother to desire a remittance, and set forth the melancholy
condition of her health, and her necessity for money, in such terms as
would have touched any bosom not void of humanity, though a stranger
to the unhappy sufferer. Her sister answered it, and I believe I have a
copy of the answer in my pocket. I keep it by me as a curiosity, and
you would think it more so could I shew you my Amelia’s letter.” He then
searched his pocket-book, and finding the letter among many others, he
read it in the following words:

“‘DEAR SISTER,--My mamma being much disordered, hath commanded me
to tell you she is both shocked and surprized at your extraordinary
request, or, as she chuses to call it, order for money. You know, my
dear, she says that your marriage with this red-coat man was entirely
against her consent and the opinion of all your family (I am sure I may
here include myself in that number); and yet, after this fatal act of
disobedience, she was prevailed on to receive you as her child; not,
however, nor are you so to understand it, as the favourite which you was
before. She forgave you; but this was as a Christian and a parent; still
preserving in her own mind a just sense of your disobedience, and a just
resentment on that account. And yet, notwithstanding this resentment,
she desires you to remember that, when you a second time ventured to
oppose her authority, and nothing would serve you but taking a ramble
(an indecent one, I can’t help saying) after your fellow, she thought
fit to shew the excess of a mother’s tenderness, and furnished you with
no less than fifty pounds for your foolish voyage. How can she, then, be
otherwise than surprized at your present demand? which, should she be
so weak to comply with, she must expect to be every month repeated, in
order to supply the extravagance of a young rakish officer. You say
she will compassionate your sufferings; yes, surely she doth greatly
compassionate them, and so do I too, though you was neither so kind nor
so civil as to suppose I should. But I forgive all your slights to me,
as well now as formerly. Nay, I not only forgive, but I pray daily
for you. But, dear sister, what could you expect less than what hath
happened? you should have believed your friends, who were wiser and
older than you. I do not here mean myself, though I own I am eleven
months and some odd weeks your superior; though, had I been younger, I
might, perhaps, have been able to advise you; for wisdom and what some
may call beauty do not always go together. You will not be offended at
this; for I know in your heart, you have always held your head above
some people, whom, perhaps, other people have thought better of; but why
do I mention what I scorn so much? No, my dear sister, Heaven forbid it
should ever be said of me that I value myself upon my face--not but if I
could believe men perhaps--but I hate and despise men--you know I do, my
dear, and I wish you had despised them as much; but _jacta est jalea_,
as the doctor says. You are to make the best of your fortune--what
fortune, I mean, my mamma may please to give you, for you know all is
in her power. Let me advise you, then, to bring your mind to your
circumstances, and remember (for I can’t help writing it, as it is
for your own good) the vapours are a distemper which very ill become a
knapsack. Remember, my dear, what you have done; remember what my mamma
hath done; remember we have something of yours to keep, and do not
consider yourself as an only child; no, nor as a favourite child; but be
pleased to remember, Dear sister, Your most affectionate sister,

“‘and most obedient humble servant,

“‘E. HARRIS.’”

“O brave Miss Betty!” cried Miss Matthews; “I always held her in high
esteem; but I protest she exceeds even what I could have expected from
her.”

“This letter, madam,” cries Booth, “you will believe, was an excellent
cordial for my poor wife’s spirits. So dreadful indeed was the effect it
had upon her, that, as she had read it in my absence, I found her, at
my return home, in the most violent fits; and so long was it before
she recovered her senses, that I despaired of that blest event ever
happening; and my own senses very narrowly escaped from being sacrificed
to my despair. However, she came at last to herself, and I began to
consider of every means of carrying her immediately to Montpelier, which
was now become much more necessary than before.

“Though I was greatly shocked at the barbarity of the letter, yet I
apprehended no very ill consequence from it; for, as it was believed all
over the army that I had married a great fortune, I had received offers
of money, if I wanted it, from more than one. Indeed, I might have
easily carried my wife to Montpelier at any time; but she was extremely
averse to the voyage, being desirous of our returning to England, as
I had leave to do; and she grew daily so much better, that, had it not
been for the receipt of that cursed--which I have just read to you, I
am persuaded she might have been able to return to England in the next
ship.

“Among others there was a colonel in the garrison who had not only
offered but importuned me to receive money of him; I now, therefore,
repaired to him; and, as a reason for altering my resolution, I produced
the letter, and, at the same time, acquainted him with the true state of
my affairs. The colonel read the letter, shook his head, and, after some
silence, said he was sorry I had refused to accept his offer before; but
that he had now so ordered matters, and disposed of his money, that he
had not a shilling left to spare from his own occasions.

“Answers of the same kind I had from several others, but not one penny
could I borrow of any; for I have been since firmly persuaded that
the honest colonel was not content with denying me himself, but took
effectual means, by spreading the secret I had so foolishly trusted him
with, to prevent me from succeeding elsewhere; for such is the nature of
men, that whoever denies himself to do you a favour is unwilling that it
should be done to you by any other.

“This was the first time I had ever felt that distress which arises from
the want of money; a distress very dreadful indeed in a married state;
for what can be more miserable than to see anything necessary to the
preservation of a beloved creature, and not be able to supply it?

“Perhaps you may wonder, madam, that I have not mentioned Captain James
on this occasion; but he was at that time laid up at Algiers (whither
he had been sent by the governor) in a fever. However, he returned time
enough to supply me, which he did with the utmost readiness on the very
first mention of my distress; and the good colonel, notwithstanding his
having disposed of his money, discounted the captain’s draft. You see,
madam, an instance in the generous behaviour of my friend James, how
false are all universal satires against humankind. He is indeed one of
the worthiest men the world ever produced.

“But, perhaps, you will be more pleased still with the extravagant
generosity of my sergeant. The day before the return of Mr. James, the
poor fellow came to me with tears in his eyes, and begged I would not
be offended at what he was going to mention. He then pulled a purse
from his pocket, which contained, he said, the sum of twelve pounds,
and which he begged me to accept, crying, he was sorry it was not in his
power to lend me whatever I wanted. I was so struck with this instance
of generosity and friendship in such a person, that I gave him an
opportunity of pressing me a second time before I made him an answer.
Indeed, I was greatly surprised how he came to be worth that little sum,
and no less at his being acquainted with my own wants. In both which
points he presently satisfied me. As to the first, it seems he had
plundered a Spanish officer of fifteen pistoles; and as to the second,
he confessed he had it from my wife’s maid, who had overheard some
discourse between her mistress and me. Indeed people, I believe, always
deceive themselves, who imagine they can conceal distrest circumstances
from their servants; for these are always extremely quicksighted on such
occasions.”

“Good heavens!” cries Miss Matthews, “how astonishing is such behaviour
in so low a fellow!”

“I thought so myself,” answered Booth; “and yet I know not, on a more
strict examination into the matter, why we should be more surprised to
see greatness of mind discover itself in one degree or rank of life than
in another. Love, benevolence, or what you will please to call it, may
be the reigning passion in a beggar as well as in a prince; and wherever
it is, its energies will be the same.

“To confess the truth, I am afraid we often compliment what we call
upper life, with too much injustice, at the expense of the lower. As it
is no rare thing to see instances which degrade human nature in persons
of the highest birth and education, so I apprehend that examples of
whatever is really great and good have been sometimes found amongst
those who have wanted all such advantages. In reality, palaces, I make
no doubt, do sometimes contain nothing but dreariness and darkness,
and the sun of righteousness hath shone forth with all its glory in a
cottage.”



