
_The story of Booth continued._


“Mr. Booth thus went on:

“We now took leave of the garrison, and, having landed at Marseilles,
arrived at Montpelier, without anything happening to us worth
remembrance, except the extreme sea-sickness of poor Amelia; but I was
afterwards well repaid for the terrors which it occasioned me by the
good consequences which attended it; for I believe it contributed, even
more than the air of Montpelier, to the perfect re-establishment of her
health.”

“I ask your pardon for interrupting you,” cries Miss Matthews, “but you
never satisfied me whether you took the sergeant’s money. You have made
me half in love with that charming fellow.”

“How can you imagine, madam,” answered Booth, “I should have taken from
a poor fellow what was of so little consequence to me, and at the same
time of so much to him? Perhaps, now, you will derive this from the
passion of pride.”

“Indeed,” says she, “I neither derive it from the passion of pride nor
from the passion of folly: but methinks you should have accepted the
offer, and I am convinced you hurt him very much when you refused it.
But pray proceed in your story.” Then Booth went on as follows:

“As Amelia recovered her health and spirits daily, we began to pass our
time very pleasantly at Montpelier; for the greatest enemy to the French
will acknowledge that they are the best people in the world to live
amongst for a little while. In some countries it is almost as easy to
get a good estate as a good acquaintance. In England, particularly,
acquaintance is of almost as slow growth as an oak; so that the age of
man scarce suffices to bring it to any perfection, and families seldom
contract any great intimacy till the third, or at least the second
generation. So shy indeed are we English of letting a stranger into our
houses, that one would imagine we regarded all such as thieves. Now the
French are the very reverse. Being a stranger among them entitles you to
the better place, and to the greater degree of civility; and if you wear
but the appearance of a gentleman, they never suspect you are not one.
Their friendship indeed seldom extends as far as their purse; nor is
such friendship usual in other countries. To say the truth, politeness
carries friendship far enough in the ordinary occasions of life, and
those who want this accomplishment rarely make amends for it by their
sincerity; for bluntness, or rather rudeness, as it commonly deserves to
be called, is not always so much a mark of honesty as it is taken to be.

“The day after our arrival we became acquainted with Mons. Bagillard.
He was a Frenchman of great wit and vivacity, with a greater share of
learning than gentlemen are usually possessed of. As he lodged in the
same house with us, we were immediately acquainted, and I liked his
conversation so well that I never thought I had too much of his company.
Indeed, I spent so much of my time with him, that Amelia (I know not
whether I ought to mention it) grew uneasy at our familiarity, and
complained of my being too little with her, from my violent fondness for
my new acquaintance; for, our conversation turning chiefly upon
books, and principally Latin ones (for we read several of the classics
together), she could have but little entertainment by being with us.
When my wife had once taken it into her head that she was deprived of my
company by M. Bagillard, it was impossible to change her opinion; and,
though I now spent more of my time with her than I had ever done
before, she still grew more and more dissatisfied, till at last she very
earnestly desired me to quit my lodgings, and insisted upon it with more
vehemence than I had ever known her express before. To say the truth, if
that excellent woman could ever be thought unreasonable, I thought she
was so on this occasion.

“But in what light soever her desires appeared to me, as they manifestly
arose from an affection of which I had daily the most endearing proofs,
I resolved to comply with her, and accordingly removed to a distant part
of the town; for it is my opinion that we can have but little love for
the person whom we will never indulge in an unreasonable demand. Indeed,
I was under a difficulty with regard to Mons. Bagillard; for, as I
could not possibly communicate to him the true reason for quitting my
lodgings, so I found it as difficult to deceive him by a counterfeit
one; besides, I was apprehensive I should have little less of his
company than before. I could, indeed, have avoided this dilemma by
leaving Montpelier, for Amelia had perfectly recovered her health; but
I had faithfully promised Captain James to wait his return from Italy,
whither he was gone some time before from Gibraltar; nor was it proper
for Amelia to take any long journey, she being now near six months gone
with child.

“This difficulty, however, proved to be less than I had imagined it;
for my French friend, whether he suspected anything from my wife’s
behaviour, though she never, as I observed, shewed him the least
incivility, became suddenly as cold on his side. After our leaving the
lodgings he never made above two or three formal visits; indeed his time
was soon after entirely taken up by an intrigue with a certain countess,
which blazed all over Montpelier.

“We had not been long in our new apartments before an English officer
arrived at Montpelier, and came to lodge in the same house with us. This
gentleman, whose name was Bath, was of the rank of a major, and had so
much singularity in his character, that, perhaps, you never heard of
any like him. He was far from having any of those bookish qualifications
which had before caused my Amelia’s disquiet. It is true, his discourse
generally turned on matters of no feminine kind; war and martial
exploits being the ordinary topics of his conversation: however, as he
had a sister with whom Amelia was greatly pleased, an intimacy presently
grew between us, and we four lived in one family.

“The major was a great dealer in the marvellous, and was constantly the
little hero of his own tale. This made him very entertaining to
Amelia, who, of all the persons in the world, hath the truest taste and
enjoyment of the ridiculous; for, whilst no one sooner discovers it in
the character of another, no one so well conceals her knowledge of it
from the ridiculous person. I cannot help mentioning a sentiment of hers
on this head, as I think it doth her great honour. ‘If I had the same
neglect,’ said she, ‘for ridiculous people with the generality of the
world, I should rather think them the objects of tears than laughter;
but, in reality, I have known several who, in some parts of their
characters, have been extremely ridiculous, in others have been
altogether as amiable. For instance,’ said she, ‘here is the major, who
tells us of many things which he has never seen, and of others which he
hath never done, and both in the most extravagant excess; and yet how
amiable is his behaviour to his poor sister, whom he hath not only
brought over hither for her health, at his own expence, but is come to
bear her company.’ I believe, madam, I repeat her very words; for I am
very apt to remember what she says.

“You will easily believe, from a circumstance I have just mentioned in
the major’s favour, especially when I have told you that his sister was
one of the best of girls, that it was entirely necessary to hide from
her all kind of laughter at any part of her brother’s behaviour. To say
the truth, this was easy enough to do; for the poor girl was so blinded
with love and gratitude, and so highly honoured and reverenced her
brother, that she had not the least suspicion that there was a person in
the world capable of laughing at him.

“Indeed, I am certain she never made the least discovery of our
ridicule; for I am well convinced she would have resented it: for,
besides the love she bore her brother, she had a little family pride,
which would sometimes appear. To say the truth, if she had any fault,
it was that of vanity, but she was a very good girl upon the whole; and
none of us are entirely free from faults.”

“You are a good-natured fellow, Will,” answered Miss Matthews; “but
vanity is a fault of the first magnitude in a woman, and often the
occasion of many others.”

To this Booth made no answer, but continued his story.

“In this company we passed two or three months very agreeably, till
the major and I both betook ourselves to our several nurseries; my wife
being brought to bed of a girl, and Miss Bath confined to her chamber by
a surfeit, which had like to have occasioned her death.”

Here Miss Matthews burst into a loud laugh, of which when Booth asked
the reason, she said she could not forbear at the thoughts of two such
nurses.

“And did you really,” says she, “make your wife’s caudle yourself?”

“Indeed, madam,” said he, “I did; and do you think that so
extraordinary?”

“Indeed I do,” answered she; “I thought the best husbands had looked on
their wives’ lying-in as a time of festival and jollity. What! did you
not even get drunk in the time of your wife’s delivery? tell me honestly
how you employed yourself at this time.”

“Why, then, honestly,” replied he, “and in defiance of your laughter, I
lay behind her bolster, and supported her in my arms; and, upon my soul,
I believe I felt more pain in my mind than she underwent in her body.
And now answer me as honestly: Do you really think it a proper time of
mirth, when the creature one loves to distraction is undergoing the most
racking torments, as well as in the most imminent danger? and--but I
need not express any more tender circumstances.”

“I am to answer honestly,” cried she. “Yes, and sincerely,” cries Booth.
“Why, then, honestly and sincerely,” says she, “may I never see heaven
if I don’t think you an angel of a man!”

“Nay, madam,” answered Booth--“but, indeed, you do me too much honour;
there are many such husbands. Nay, have we not an example of the like
tenderness in the major? though as to him, I believe, I shall make you
laugh. While my wife lay-in, Miss Bath being extremely ill, I went one
day to the door of her apartment, to enquire after her health, as well
as for the major, whom I had not seen during a whole week. I knocked
softly at the door, and being bid to open it, I found the major in
his sister’s ante-chamber warming her posset. His dress was certainly
whimsical enough, having on a woman’s bedgown and a very dirty flannel
nightcap, which, being added to a very odd person (for he is a very
awkward thin man, near seven feet high), might have formed, in the
opinion of most men, a very proper object of laughter. The major started
from his seat at my entering into the room, and, with much emotion, and
a great oath, cried out, ‘Is it you, sir?’ I then enquired after his and
his sister’s health. He answered, that his sister was better, and he was
very well, ‘though I did not expect, sir,’ cried he, with not a little
confusion, ‘to be seen by you in this situation.’ I told him I
thought it impossible he could appear in a situation more becoming his
character. ‘You do not?’ answered he. ‘By G---- I am very much obliged
to you for that opinion; but, I believe, sir, however my weakness may
prevail on me to descend from it, no man can be more conscious of his
own dignity than myself.’ His sister then called to him from the inner
room; upon which he rang the bell for her servant, and then, after a
stride or two across the room, he said, with an elated aspect, ‘I
would not have you think, Mr. Booth, because you have caught me in
this deshabille, by coming upon me a little too abruptly--I cannot help
saying a little too abruptly--that I am my sister’s nurse. I know better
what is due to the dignity of a man, and I have shewn it in a line of
battle. I think I have made a figure there, Mr. Booth, and becoming my
character; by G---- I ought not to be despised too much if my nature is
not totally without its weaknesses.’ He uttered this, and some more of
the same kind, with great majesty, or, as he called it, dignity. Indeed,
he used some hard words that I did not understand; for all his words
are not to be found in a dictionary. Upon the whole, I could not easily
refrain from laughter; however, I conquered myself, and soon after
retired from him, astonished that it was possible for a man to possess
true goodness, and be at the same time ashamed of it.

“But, if I was surprized at what had past at this visit, how much more
was I surprized the next morning, when he came very early to my chamber,
and told me he had not been able to sleep one wink at what had past
between us! ‘There were some words of yours,’ says he, ‘which must be
further explained before we part. You told me, sir, when you found me
in that situation, which I cannot bear to recollect, that you thought
I could not appear in one more becoming my character; these were the
words--I shall never forget them. Do you imagine that there is any of
the dignity of a man wanting in my character? do you think that I have,
during my sister’s illness, behaved with a weakness that savours too
much of effeminacy? I know how much it is beneath a man to whine and
whimper about a trifling girl as well as you or any man; and, if my
sister had died, I should have behaved like a man on the occasion. I
would not have you think I confined myself from company merely upon her
account. I was very much disordered myself. And when you surprized me
in that situation--I repeat again, in that situation--her nurse had
not left the room three minutes, and I was blowing the fire for fear it
should have gone out.’--In this manner he ran on almost a quarter of an
hour before he would suffer me to speak. At last, looking steadfastly
in his face, I asked him if I must conclude that he was in earnest? ‘In
earnest!’ says he, repeating my words, ‘do you then take my character
for a jest?’--Lookee, sir, said I, very gravely, I think we know one
another very well; and I have no reason to suspect you should impute it
to fear when I tell you I was so far from intending to affront you, that
I meant you one of the highest compliments. Tenderness for women is so
far from lessening, that it proves a true manly character. The manly
Brutus shewed the utmost tenderness to his Portia; and the great king
of Sweden, the bravest, and even fiercest of men, shut himself up three
whole days in the midst of a campaign, and would see no company, on the
death of a favourite sister. At these words I saw his features soften;
and he cried out, ‘D--n me, I admire the king of Sweden of all the men
in the world; and he is a rascal that is ashamed of doing anything which
the king of Sweden did.--And yet, if any king of Sweden in France was to
tell me that his sister had more merit than mine, by G---- I’d knock
his brains about his ears. Poor little Betsy! she is the honestest,
worthiest girl that ever was born. Heaven be praised, she is recovered;
for, if I had lost her, I never should have enjoyed another happy
moment.’ In this manner he ran on some time, till the tears began to
overflow; which when he perceived, he stopt; perhaps he was unable to go
on; for he seemed almost choaked: after a short silence, however, having
wiped his eyes with his handkerchief, he fetched a deep sigh, and cried,
‘I am ashamed you should see this, Mr. Booth; but d--n me, nature will
get the better of dignity.’ I now comforted him with the example of
Xerxes, as I had before done with that of the king of Sweden; and soon
after we sat down to breakfast together with much cordial friendship;
for I assure you, with all his oddity, there is not a better-natured man
in the world than the major.”

“Good-natured, indeed!” cries Miss Matthews, with great scorn. “A fool!
how can you mention such a fellow with commendation?”

Booth spoke as much as he could in defence of his friend; indeed, he
had represented him in as favourable a light as possible, and had
particularly left out those hard words with which, as he hath observed a
little before, the major interlarded his discourse. Booth then proceeded
as in the next chapter.



