
_In which Mr. Booth relates his return to England._


“Nothing remarkable, as I remember, happened during our stay at Paris,
which we left soon after and came to London. Here we rested only two
days, and then, taking leave of our fellow-travellers, we set out for
Wiltshire, my wife being so impatient to see the child which she had
left behind her, that the child she carried with her was almost killed
with the fatigue of the journey.

“We arrived at our inn late in the evening. Amelia, though she had no
great reason to be pleased with any part of her sister’s behaviour,
resolved to behave to her as if nothing wrong had ever happened. She
therefore sent a kind note to her the moment of our arrival, giving
her her option, whether she would come to us at the inn, or whether we
should that evening wait on her. The servant, after waiting an hour,
brought us an answer, excusing her from coming to us so late, as she
was disordered with a cold, and desiring my wife by no means to think
of venturing out after the fatigue of her journey; saying, she would, on
that account, defer the great pleasure of seeing her till the morning,
without taking any more notice of your humble servant than if no
such person had been in the world, though I had very civilly sent my
compliments to her. I should not mention this trifle, if it was not to
shew you the nature of the woman, and that it will be a kind of key to
her future conduct.

“When the servant returned, the good doctor, who had been with us almost
all the time of his absence, hurried us away to his house, where we
presently found a supper and a bed prepared for us. My wife was eagerly
desirous to see her child that night; but the doctor would not suffer
it; and, as he was at nurse at a distant part of the town, and the
doctor assured her he had seen him in perfect health that evening, she
suffered herself at last to be dissuaded.

“We spent that evening in the most agreeable manner; for the doctor’s
wit and humour, joined to the highest chearfulness and good nature, made
him the most agreeable companion in the world: and he was now in the
highest spirits, which he was pleased to place to our account. We
sat together to a very late hour; for so excellent is my wife’s
constitution, that she declared she was scarce sensible of any fatigue
from her late journeys.

“Amelia slept not a wink all night, and in the morning early the doctor
accompanied us to the little infant. The transports we felt on this
occasion were really enchanting, nor can any but a fond parent conceive,
I am certain, the least idea of them. Our imaginations suggested
a hundred agreeable circumstances, none of which had, perhaps, any
foundation. We made words and meaning out of every sound, and in every
feature found out some resemblance to my Amelia, as she did to me.

“But I ask your pardon for dwelling on such incidents, and will proceed
to scenes which, to most persons, will be more entertaining.

“We went hence to pay a visit to Miss Harris, whose reception of us was,
I think, truly ridiculous; and, as you know the lady, I will endeavour
to describe it particularly. At our first arrival we were ushered into
a parlour, where we were suffered to wait almost an hour. At length the
lady of the house appeared in deep mourning, with a face, if possible,
more dismal than her dress, in which, however, there was every
appearance of art. Her features were indeed skrewed up to the very
height of grief. With this face, and in the most solemn gait, she
approached Amelia, and coldly saluted her. After which she made me a
very distant formal courtesy, and we all sat down. A short silence now
ensued, which Miss Harris at length broke with a deep sigh, and said,
‘Sister, here is a great alteration in this place since you saw it last;
Heaven hath been pleased to take my poor mother to itself.’--(Here she
wiped her eyes, and then continued.)--‘I hope I know my duty, and have
learned a proper resignation to the divine will; but something is to be
allowed to grief for the best of mothers; for so she was to us both; and
if at last she made any distinction, she must have had her reasons for
so doing. I am sure I can truly say I never wished, much less desired
it.’ The tears now stood in poor Amelia’s eyes; indeed, she had paid too
many already for the memory of so unnatural a parent. She answered, with
the sweetness of an angel, that she was far from blaming her sister’s
emotions on so tender an occasion; that she heartily joined with her in
her grief; for that nothing which her mother had done in the latter part
of her life could efface the remembrance of that tenderness which she
had formerly shewn her. Her sister caught hold of the word efface, and
rung the changes upon it.--‘Efface!’ cried she, ‘O Miss Emily (for you
must not expect me to repeat names that will be for ever odious), I wish
indeed everything could be effaced.--Effaced! O that that was possible!
we might then have still enjoyed my poor mother; for I am convinced she
never recovered her grief on a certain occasion.’--Thus she ran on, and,
after many bitter strokes upon her sister, at last directly charged her
mother’s death on my marriage with Amelia. I could be silent then no
longer. I reminded her of the perfect reconciliation between us before
my departure, and the great fondness which she expressed for me; nor
could I help saying, in very plain terms, that if she had ever changed
her opinion of me, as I was not conscious of having deserved such a
change by my own behaviour, I was well convinced to whose good offices
I owed it. Guilt hath very quick ears to an accusation. Miss Harris
immediately answered to the charge. She said, such suspicions were no
more than she expected; that they were of a piece with every other part
of my conduct, and gave her one consolation, that they served to account
for her sister Emily’s unkindness, as well to herself as to her poor
deceased mother, and in some measure lessened the guilt of it with
regard to her, since it was not easy to know how far a woman is in the
power of her husband. My dear Amelia reddened at this reflection on
me, and begged her sister to name any single instance of unkindness or
disrespect in which she had ever offended. To this the other answered
(I am sure I repeat her words, though I cannot mimic either the voice or
air with which they were spoken)--‘Pray, Miss Emily, which is to be the
judge, yourself or that gentleman? I remember the time when I could
have trusted to your judgment in any affair; but you are now no longer
mistress of yourself, and are not answerable for your actions. Indeed,
it is my constant prayer that your actions may not be imputed to you.
It was the constant prayer of that blessed woman, my dear mother, who
is now a saint above; a saint whose name I can never mention without a
tear, though I find you can hear it without one. I cannot help observing
some concern on so melancholy an occasion; it seems due to decency; but,
perhaps (for I always wish to excuse you) you are forbid to cry.’ The
idea of being bid or forbid to cry struck so strongly on my fancy,
that indignation only could have prevented me from laughing. But my
narrative, I am afraid, begins to grow tedious. In short, after hearing,
for near an hour, every malicious insinuation which a fertile genius
could invent, we took our leave, and separated as persons who would
never willingly meet again.

“The next morning after this interview Amelia received a long letter
from Miss Harris; in which, after many bitter invectives against me, she
excused her mother, alledging that she had been driven to do as she did
in order to prevent Amelia’s ruin, if her fortune had fallen into
my hands. She likewise very remotely hinted that she would be only a
trustee for her sister’s children, and told her that on one condition
only she would consent to live with her as a sister. This was, if she
could by any means be separated from that man, as she was pleased to
call me, who had caused so much mischief in the family.

“I was so enraged at this usage, that, had not Amelia intervened, I
believe I should have applied to a magistrate for a search-warrant for
that picture, which there was so much reason to suspect she had stolen;
and which I am convinced, upon a search, we should have found in her
possession.”

“Nay, it is possible enough,” cries Miss Matthews; “for I believe there
is no wickedness of which the lady is not capable.”

“This agreeable letter was succeeded by another of the like comfortable
kind, which informed me that the company in which I was, being an
additional one raised in the beginning of the war, was reduced; so that
I was now a lieutenant on half-pay.

“Whilst we were meditating on our present situation the good doctor came
to us. When we related to him the manner in which my sister had treated
us, he cried out, ‘Poor soul! I pity her heartily;’ for this is the
severest resentment he ever expresses; indeed, I have often heard him
say that a wicked soul is the greatest object of compassion in the
world.”--A sentiment which we shall leave the reader a little time to
digest.



