
_In which Mr. Booth concludes his story._


“The next day the doctor set out for his parsonage, which was about
thirty miles distant, whither Amelia and myself accompanied him, and
where we stayed with him all the time of his residence there, being
almost three months.

“The situation of the parish under my good friend’s care is very
pleasant. It is placed among meadows, washed by a clear trout-stream,
and flanked on both sides with downs. His house, indeed, would not much
attract the admiration of the virtuoso. He built it himself, and it
is remarkable only for its plainness; with which the furniture so well
agrees, that there is no one thing in it that may not be absolutely
necessary, except books, and the prints of Mr. Hogarth, whom he calls a
moral satirist.

“Nothing, however, can be imagined more agreeable than the life that the
doctor leads in this homely house, which he calls his earthly paradise.
All his parishioners, whom he treats as his children, regard him as
their common father. Once in a week he constantly visits every house in
the parish, examines, commends, and rebukes, as he finds occasion.
This is practised likewise by his curate in his absence; and so good
an effect is produced by this their care, that no quarrels ever proceed
either to blows or law-suits; no beggar is to be found in the whole
parish; nor did I ever hear a very profane oath all the time I lived in
it.

“But to return from so agreeable a digression, to my own affairs,
that are much less worth your attention. In the midst of all the
pleasures I tasted in this sweet place and in the most delightful
company, the woman and man whom I loved above all things, melancholy
reflexions concerning my unhappy circumstances would often steal into my
thoughts. My fortune was now reduced to less than forty pounds a-year; I
had already two children, and my dear Amelia was again with child.

“One day the doctor found me sitting by myself, and employed in
melancholy contemplations on this subject. He told me he had observed
me growing of late very serious; that he knew the occasion, and neither
wondered at nor blamed me. He then asked me if I had any prospect of
going again into the army; if not, what scheme of life I proposed to
myself?

“I told him that, as I had no powerful friends, I could have but little
expectations in a military way; that I was as incapable of thinking of
any other scheme, as all business required some knowledge or experience,
and likewise money to set up with; of all which I was destitute.

“‘You must know then, child,’ said the doctor, ‘that I have been
thinking on this subject as well as you; for I can think, I promise you,
with a pleasant countenance.’ These were his words. ‘As to the army,
perhaps means might be found of getting you another commission; but my
daughter seems to have a violent objection to it; and to be plain, I
fancy you yourself will find no glory make you amends for your absence
from her. And for my part,’ said he, ‘I never think those men wise who,
for any worldly interest, forego the greatest happiness of their lives.
If I mistake not,’ says he, ‘a country life, where you could be always
together, would make you both much happier people.’

“I answered, that of all things I preferred it most; and I believed
Amelia was of the same opinion.

“The doctor, after a little hesitation, proposed to me to turn farmer,
and offered to let me his parsonage, which was then become vacant. He
said it was a farm which required but little stock, and that little
should not be wanting.

“I embraced this offer very eagerly, and with great thankfulness, and
immediately repaired to Amelia to communicate it to her, and to know her
sentiments.

“Amelia received the news with the highest transports of joy; she said
that her greatest fear had always been of my entring again into the
army. She was so kind as to say that all stations of life were equal to
her, unless as one afforded her more of my company than another. ‘And as
to our children,’ said she, ‘let us breed them up to an humble fortune,
and they will be contented with it; for none,’ added my angel, ‘deserve
happiness, or, indeed, are capable of it, who make any particular
station a necessary ingredient.’”

“Thus, madam, you see me degraded from my former rank in life; no longer
Captain Booth, but farmer Booth at your service.

“During my first year’s continuance in this new scene of life, nothing,
I think, remarkable happened; the history of one day would, indeed, be
the history of the whole year.”

“Well, pray then,” said Miss Matthews, “do let us hear the history of
that day; I have a strange curiosity to know how you could kill your
time; and do, if possible, find out the very best day you can.”

“If you command me, madam,” answered Booth, “you must yourself be
accountable for the dulness of the narrative. Nay, I believe, you have
imposed a very difficult task on me; for the greatest happiness is
incapable of description.

“I rose then, madam--”

“O, the moment you waked, undoubtedly,” said Miss Matthews.

“Usually,” said he, “between five and six.”

“I will have no usually,” cried Miss Matthews, “you are confined to a
day, and it is to be the best and happiest in the year.”

“Nay, madam,” cries Booth, “then I must tell you the day in which Amelia
was brought to bed, after a painful and dangerous labour; for that I
think was the happiest day of my life.”

“I protest,” said she, “you are become farmer Booth, indeed. What a
happiness have you painted to my imagination! you put me in mind of a
newspaper, where my lady such-a-one is delivered of a son, to the great
joy of some illustrious family.”

“Why then, I do assure you, Miss Matthews,” cries Booth, “I scarce know
a circumstance that distinguished one day from another. The whole
was one continued series of love, health, and tranquillity. Our lives
resembled a calm sea.”--

“The dullest of all ideas,” cries the lady.

“I know,” said he, “it must appear dull in description, for who can
describe the pleasures which the morning air gives to one in perfect
health; the flow of spirits which springs up from exercise; the delights
which parents feel from the prattle and innocent follies of their
children; the joy with which the tender smile of a wife inspires a
husband; or lastly, the chearful, solid comfort which a fond couple
enjoy in each other’s conversation?--All these pleasures and every other
of which our situation was capable we tasted in the highest degree. Our
happiness was, perhaps, too great; for fortune seemed to grow envious
of it, and interposed one of the most cruel accidents that could have
befallen us by robbing us of our dear friend the doctor.”

“I am sorry for it,” said Miss Matthews. “He was indeed a valuable man,
and I never heard of his death before.”

“Long may it be before any one hears of it!” cries Booth. “He is,
indeed, dead to us; but will, I hope, enjoy many happy years of life.
You know, madam, the obligations he had to his patron the earl; indeed,
it was impossible to be once in his company without hearing of them. I
am sure you will neither wonder that he was chosen to attend the
young lord in his travels as his tutor, nor that the good man, however
disagreeable it might be (as in fact it was) to his inclination, should
comply with the earnest request of his friend and patron.

“By this means I was bereft not only of the best companion in the world,
but of the best counsellor; a loss of which I have since felt the bitter
consequence; for no greater advantage, I am convinced, can arrive to
a young man, who hath any degree of understanding, than an intimate
converse with one of riper years, who is not only able to advise, but
who knows the manner of advising. By this means alone, youth can enjoy
the benefit of the experience of age, and that at a time of life when
such experience will be of more service to a man than when he hath lived
long enough to acquire it of himself.

“From want of my sage counsellor, I now fell into many errors. The first
of these was in enlarging my business, by adding a farm of one hundred
a year to the parsonage, in renting which I had also as bad a bargain as
the doctor had before given me a good one. The consequence of which
was, that whereas, at the end of the first year, I was worth upwards
of fourscore pounds; at the end of the second I was near half that sum
worse (as the phrase is) than nothing.

“A second folly I was guilty of in uniting families with the curate of
the parish, who had just married, as my wife and I thought, a very good
sort of a woman. We had not, however, lived one month together before I
plainly perceived this good sort of a woman had taken a great prejudice
against my Amelia, for which, if I had not known something of the human
passions, and that high place which envy holds among them, I should not
have been able to account, for, so far was my angel from having given
her any cause of dislike, that she had treated her not only with
civility, but kindness.

“Besides superiority in beauty, which, I believe, all the world would
have allowed to Amelia, there was another cause of this envy, which I am
almost ashamed to mention, as it may well be called my greatest folly.
You are to know then, madam, that from a boy I had been always fond of
driving a coach, in which I valued myself on having some skill. This,
perhaps, was an innocent, but I allow it to have been a childish vanity.
As I had an opportunity, therefore, of buying an old coach and harness
very cheap (indeed they cost me but twelve pounds), and as I considered
that the same horses which drew my waggons would likewise draw my coach,
I resolved on indulging myself in the purchase.

“The consequence of setting up this poor old coach is inconceivable.
Before this, as my wife and myself had very little distinguished
ourselves from the other farmers and their wives, either in our dress or
our way of living, they treated us as their equals; but now they began
to consider us as elevating ourselves into a state of superiority,
and immediately began to envy, hate, and declare war against us. The
neighbouring little squires, too, were uneasy to see a poor renter
become their equal in a matter in which they placed so much dignity;
and, not doubting but it arose in me from the same ostentation, they
began to hate me likewise, and to turn my equipage into ridicule,
asserting that my horses, which were as well matched as any in the
kingdom, were of different colours and sizes, with much more of that
kind of wit, the only basis of which is lying.

“But what will appear most surprizing to you, madam, was, that the
curate’s wife, who, being lame, had more use of the coach than my Amelia
(indeed she seldom went to church in any other manner), was one of my
bitterest enemies on the occasion. If she had ever any dispute with
Amelia, which all the sweetness of my poor girl could not sometimes
avoid, she was sure to introduce with a malicious sneer, ‘Though my
husband doth not keep a coach, madam.’ Nay, she took this opportunity to
upbraid my wife with the loss of her fortune, alledging that some folks
might have had as good pretensions to a coach as other folks, and a
better too, as they brought a better fortune to their husbands, but that
all people had not the art of making brick without straw.

“You will wonder, perhaps, madam, how I can remember such stuff, which,
indeed, was a long time only matter of amusement to both Amelia and
myself; but we at last experienced the mischievous nature of envy,
and that it tends rather to produce tragical than comical events.
My neighbours now began to conspire against me. They nicknamed me
in derision, the Squire Farmer. Whatever I bought, I was sure to buy
dearer, and when I sold I was obliged to sell cheaper, than any other.
In fact, they were all united, and, while they every day committed
trespasses on my lands with impunity, if any of my cattle escaped into
their fields, I was either forced to enter into a law-suit or to make
amends fourfold for the damage sustained.

“The consequences of all this could be no other than that ruin which
ensued. Without tiring you with particulars, before the end of four
years I became involved in debt near three hundred pounds more than the
value of all my effects. My landlord seized my stock for rent, and, to
avoid immediate confinement in prison, I was forced to leave the country
with all that I hold dear in the world, my wife and my poor little
family.

“In this condition I arrived in town five or six days ago. I had just
taken a lodging in the verge of the court, and had writ my dear Amelia
word where she might find me, when she had settled her affairs in the
best manner she could. That very evening, as I was returning home from
a coffee-house, a fray happening in the street, I endeavoured to assist
the injured party, when I was seized by the watch, and, after being
confined all night in the round-house, was conveyed in the morning
before a justice of peace, who committed me hither; where I should
probably have starved, had I not from your hands found a most
unaccountable preservation.--And here, give me leave to assure you, my
dear Miss Matthews, that, whatever advantage I may have reaped from your
misfortune, I sincerely lament it; nor would I have purchased any relief
to myself at the price of seeing you in this dreadful place.”

He spake these last words with great tenderness; for he was a man of
consummate good nature, and had formerly had much affection for this
young lady; indeed, more than the generality of people are capable of
entertaining for any person whatsoever.




BOOK IV.


