
_The latter part of which we expect will please our reader better than
the former._


A whole week did our lady and gentleman live in this criminal
conversation, in which the happiness of the former was much more perfect
than that of the latter; for, though the charms of Miss Matthews, and
her excessive endearments, sometimes lulled every thought in the sweet
lethargy of pleasure, yet in the intervals of his fits his virtue
alarmed and roused him, and brought the image of poor injured Amelia to
haunt and torment him. In fact, if we regard this world only, it is the
interest of every man to be either perfectly good or completely bad. He
had better destroy his conscience than gently wound it. The many bitter
reflections which every bad action costs a mind in which there are any
remains of goodness are not to be compensated by the highest pleasures
which such an action can produce.

So it happened to Mr. Booth. Repentance never failed to follow his
transgressions; and yet so perverse is our judgment, and so slippery
is the descent of vice when once we are entered into it, the same crime
which he now repented of became a reason for doing that which was to
cause his future repentance; and he continued to sin on because he had
begun. His repentance, however, returned still heavier and heavier,
till, at last, it flung him into a melancholy, which Miss Matthews
plainly perceived, and at which she could not avoid expressing some
resentment in obscure hints and ironical compliments on Amelia’s
superiority to her whole sex, who could not cloy a gay young fellow
by many years’ possession. She would then repeat the compliments which
others had made to her own beauty, and could not forbear once crying
out, “Upon my soul, my dear Billy, I believe the chief disadvantage on
my side is my superior fondness; for love, in the minds of men, hath
one quality, at least, of a fever, which is to prefer coldness in the
object. Confess, dear Will, is there not something vastly refreshing
in the cool air of a prude?” Booth fetched a deep sigh, and begged her
never more to mention Amelia’s name. “O Will,” cries she, “did that
request proceed from the motive I could wish, I should be the happiest
of womankind.”--“You would not, sure, madam,” said Booth, “desire a
sacrifice which I must be a villain to make to any?”--“Desire!” answered
she, “are there any bounds to the desires of love? have not I been
sacrificed? hath not my first love been torn from my bleeding heart? I
claim a prior right. As for sacrifices, I can make them too, and would
sacrifice the whole world at the least call of my love.”

Here she delivered a letter to Booth, which she had received within an
hour, the contents of which were these:--

“DEAREST MADAM,--Those only who truly know what love is, can have any
conception of the horrors I felt at hearing of your confinement at my
arrival in town, which was this morning. I immediately sent my lawyer to
enquire into the particulars, who brought me the agreeable news that the
man, whose heart’s blood ought not to be valued at the rate of a single
hair of yours, is entirely out of all danger, and that you might
be admitted to bail. I presently ordered him to go with two of my
tradesmen, who are to be bound in any sum for your appearance, if
he should be mean enough to prosecute you. Though you may expect my
attorney with you soon, I would not delay sending this, as I hope the
news will be agreeable to you. My chariot will attend at the same time
to carry you wherever you please. You may easily guess what a violence
I have done to myself in not waiting on you in person; but I, who know
your delicacy, feared it might offend, and that you might think me
ungenerous enough to hope from your distresses that happiness which I
am resolved to owe to your free gift alone, when your good nature shall
induce you to bestow on me what no man living can merit. I beg you will
pardon all the contents of this hasty letter, and do me the honour of
believing me, Dearest madam,

Your most passionate admirer,

and most obedient humble servant,

DAMON.”

Booth thought he had somewhere before seen the same hand, but in his
present hurry of spirits could not recollect whose it was, nor did the
lady give him any time for reflection; for he had scarce read the letter
when she produced a little bit of paper and cried out, “Here, sir,
here are the contents which he fears will offend me.” She then put a
bank-bill of a hundred pounds into Mr. Booth’s hands, and asked him with
a smile if he did not think she had reason to be offended with so much
insolence?

Before Booth could return any answer the governor arrived, and
introduced Mr. Rogers the attorney, who acquainted the lady that he had
brought her discharge from her confinement, and that a chariot waited at
the door to attend her wherever she pleased.

She received the discharge from Mr. Rogers, and said she was very much
obliged to the gentleman who employed him, but that she would not make
use of the chariot, as she had no notion of leaving that wretched place
in a triumphant manner; in which resolution, when the attorney found her
obstinate, he withdrew, as did the governor, with many bows and as many
ladyships.

They were no sooner gone than Booth asked the lady why she would refuse
the chariot of a gentleman who had behaved with such excessive respect?
She looked earnestly upon him, and cried, “How unkind is that question!
do you imagine I would go and leave you in such a situation? thou
knowest but little of Calista. Why, do you think I would accept this
hundred pounds from a man I dislike, unless it was to be serviceable
to the man I love? I insist on your taking it as your own and using
whatever you want of it.”

Booth protested in the solemnest manner that he would not touch a
shilling of it, saying, he had already received too many obligations at
her hands, and more than ever he should be able, he feared, to repay.
“How unkind,” answered she, “is every word you say, why will you mention
obligations? love never confers any. It doth everything for its own
sake. I am not therefore obliged to the man whose passion makes him
generous; for I feel how inconsiderable the whole world would appear to
me if I could throw it after my heart.”

Much more of this kind past, she still pressing the bank-note upon
him, and he as absolutely refusing, till Booth left the lady to dress
herself, and went to walk in the area of the prison.

Miss Matthews now applied to the governor to know by what means she
might procure the captain his liberty. The governor answered, “As he
cannot get bail, it will be a difficult matter; and money to be sure
there must be; for people no doubt expect to touch on these occasions.
When prisoners have not wherewithal as the law requires to entitle
themselves to justice, why they must be beholden to other people to give
them their liberty; and people will not, to be sure, suffer others to
be beholden to them for nothing, whereof there is good reason; for how
should we all live if it was not for these things?” “Well, well,”
 said she, “and how much will it cost?” “How much!” answered he,--“How
much!--why, let me see.”--Here he hesitated some time, and then answered
“That for five guineas he would undertake to procure the captain his
discharge. “That being the sum which he computed to remain in the lady’s
pocket; for, as to the gentleman’s, he had long been acquainted with the
emptiness of it.

Miss Matthews, to whom money was as dirt (indeed she may be thought not
to have known the value of it), delivered him the bank-bill, and bid
him get it changed; for if the whole, says she, will procure him his
liberty, he shall have it this evening.

“The whole, madam!” answered the governor, as soon as he had recovered
his breath, for it almost forsook him at the sight of the black word
hundred--“No, no; there might be people indeed--but I am not one of
those. A hundred! no, nor nothing like it.--As for myself, as I said, I
will be content with five guineas, and I am sure that’s little enough.
What other people will expect I cannot exactly say. To be sure his
worship’s clerk will expect to touch pretty handsomely; as for his
worship himself, he never touches anything, that is, not to speak of;
but then the constable will expect something, and the watchman must have
something, and the lawyers on both sides, they must have their fees
for finishing.”--“Well,” said she, “I leave all to you. If it costs me
twenty pounds I will have him discharged this afternoon.--But you
must give his discharge into my hands without letting the captain know
anything of the matter.”

The governor promised to obey her commands in every particular; nay, he
was so very industrious, that, though dinner was just then coming upon
the table, at her earnest request he set out immediately on the purpose,
and went as he said in pursuit of the lawyer.

All the other company assembled at table as usual, where poor Booth was
the only person out of spirits. This was imputed by all present to a
wrong cause; nay, Miss Matthews herself either could not or would
not suspect that there was anything deeper than the despair of being
speedily discharged that lay heavy on his mind.

However, the mirth of the rest, and a pretty liberal quantity of punch,
which he swallowed after dinner (for Miss Matthews had ordered a very
large bowl at her own expense to entertain the good company at her
farewell), so far exhilarated his spirits, that when the young lady
and he retired to their tea he had all the marks of gayety in his
countenance, and his eyes sparkled with good humour.

The gentleman and lady had spent about two hours in tea and
conversation, when the governor returned, and privately delivered to the
lady the discharge for her friend, and the sum of eighty-two pounds five
shillings; the rest having been, he said, disbursed in the business, of
which he was ready at any time to render an exact account.

Miss Matthews being again alone with Mr. Booth, she put the discharge
into his hands, desiring him to ask her no questions; and adding,
“I think, sir, we have neither of us now anything more to do at this
place.” She then summoned the governor, and ordered a bill of that day’s
expense, for long scores were not usual there; and at the same time
ordered a hackney coach, without having yet determined whither she would
go, but fully determined she was, wherever she went, to take Mr. Booth
with her.

The governor was now approaching with a long roll of paper, when a faint
voice was heard to cry out hastily, “Where is he?”--and presently a
female spectre, all pale and breathless, rushed into the room, and fell
into Mr. Booth’s arms, where she immediately fainted away.

Booth made a shift to support his lovely burden; though he was himself
in a condition very little different from hers. Miss Matthews likewise,
who presently recollected the face of Amelia, was struck motionless
with the surprize, nay, the governor himself, though not easily moved at
sights of horror, stood aghast, and neither offered to speak nor stir.

Happily for Amelia, the governess of the mansions had, out of curiosity,
followed her into the room, and was the only useful person present on
this occasion: she immediately called for water, and ran to the lady’s
assistance, fell to loosening her stays, and performed all the offices
proper at such a season; which had so good an effect, that Amelia soon
recovered the disorder which the violent agitation of her spirits had
caused, and found herself alive and awake in her husband’s arms.

Some tender caresses and a soft whisper or two passed privately between
Booth and his lady; nor was it without great difficulty that poor Amelia
put some restraint on her fondness in a place so improper for a tender
interview. She now cast her eyes round the room, and, fixing them on
Miss Matthews, who stood like a statue, she soon recollected her, and,
addressing her by her name, said, “Sure, madam, I cannot be mistaken in
those features; though meeting you here might almost make me suspect my
memory.”

Miss Matthews’s face was now all covered with scarlet. The reader may
easily believe she was on no account pleased with Amelia’s presence;
indeed, she expected from her some of those insults of which virtuous
women are generally so liberal to a frail sister: but she was mistaken;
Amelia was not one

     Who thought the nation ne’er would thrive,
     Till all the whores were burnt alive.

Her virtue could support itself with its own intrinsic worth, without
borrowing any assistance from the vices of other women; and she
considered their natural infirmities as the objects of pity, not of
contempt or abhorrence.

When Amelia therefore perceived the visible confusion in Miss Matthews
she presently called to remembrance some stories which she had
imperfectly heard; for, as she was not naturally attentive to scandal,
and had kept very little company since her return to England, she was
far from being a mistress of the lady’s whole history. However, she had
heard enough to impute her confusion to the right cause; she advanced to
her, and told her, she was extremely sorry to meet her in such a place,
but hoped that no very great misfortune was the occasion of it.

Miss Matthews began, by degrees, to recover her spirits. She answered,
with a reserved air, “I am much obliged to you, madam, for your concern;
we are all liable to misfortunes in this world. Indeed, I know not why
I should be much ashamed of being in any place where I am in such good
company.”

Here Booth interposed. He had before acquainted Amelia in a whisper that
his confinement was at an end. “The unfortunate accident, my dear,” said
he, “which brought this young lady to this melancholy place is entirely
determined; and she is now as absolutely at her liberty as myself.”

Amelia, imputing the extreme coldness and reserve of the lady to the
cause already mentioned, advanced still more and more in proportion as
she drew back; till the governor, who had withdrawn some time, returned,
and acquainted Miss Matthews that her coach was at the door; upon which
the company soon separated. Amelia and Booth went together in Amelia’s
coach, and poor Miss Matthews was obliged to retire alone, after
having satisfied the demands of the governor, which in one day only had
amounted to a pretty considerable sum; for he, with great dexterity,
proportioned the bills to the abilities of his guests.

It may seem, perhaps, wonderful to some readers, that Miss Matthews
should have maintained that cold reserve towards Amelia, so as barely to
keep within the rules of civility, instead of embracing an opportunity
which seemed to offer of gaining some degree of intimacy with a wife
whose husband she was so fond of; but, besides that her spirits were
entirely disconcerted by so sudden and unexpected a disappointment; and
besides the extreme horrors which she conceived at the presence of her
rival, there is, I believe, something so outrageously suspicious in
the nature of all vice, especially when joined with any great degree of
pride, that the eyes of those whom we imagine privy to our failings are
intolerable to us, and we are apt to aggravate their opinions to our
disadvantage far beyond the reality.



