
_In which Amelia appears in no unamiable light._


Amelia, with the assistance of a little girl, who was their only
servant, had drest her dinner, and she had likewise drest herself as
neat as any lady who had a regular sett of servants could have done,
when Booth returned, and brought with him his friend James, whom he had
met with in the Park; and who, as Booth absolutely refused to dine away
from his wife, to whom he had promised to return, had invited himself to
dine with him. Amelia had none of that paultry pride which possesses so
many of her sex, and which disconcerts their tempers, and gives them the
air and looks of furies, if their husbands bring in an unexpected guest,
without giving them timely warning to provide a sacrifice to their
own vanity. Amelia received her husband’s friend with the utmost
complaisance and good humour: she made indeed some apology for the
homeliness of her dinner; but it was politely turned as a compliment to
Mr. James’s friendship, which could carry him where he was sure of being
so ill entertained; and gave not the least hint how magnificently
she would have provided _had she expected the favour of so much good
company._ A phrase which is generally meant to contain not only an
apology for the lady of the house, but a tacit satire on her guests for
their intrusion, and is at least a strong insinuation that they are not
welcome.

Amelia failed not to enquire very earnestly after her old friend Mrs.
James, formerly Miss Bath, and was very sorry to find that she was not
in town. The truth was, as James had married out of a violent liking of,
or appetite to, her person, possession had surfeited him, and he was
now grown so heartily tired of his wife, that she had very little of
his company; she was forced therefore to content herself with being the
mistress of a large house and equipage in the country ten months in the
year by herself. The other two he indulged her with the diversions of
the town; but then, though they lodged under the same roof, she had
little more of her husband’s society than if they had been one hundred
miles apart. With all this, as she was a woman of calm passions, she
made herself contented; for she had never had any violent affection for
James: the match was of the prudent kind, and to her advantage; for his
fortune, by the death of an uncle, was become very considerable; and
she had gained everything by the bargain but a husband, which her
constitution suffered her to be very well satisfied without.

When Amelia, after dinner, retired to her children, James began to talk
to his friend concerning his affairs. He advised Booth very earnestly to
think of getting again into the army, in which he himself had met with
such success, that he had obtained the command of a regiment to which
his brother-in-law was lieutenant-colonel. These preferments they both
owed to the favour of fortune only; for, though there was no objection
to either of their military characters, yet neither of them had any
extraordinary desert; and, if merit in the service was a sufficient
recommendation, Booth, who had been twice wounded in the siege, seemed
to have the fairest pretensions; but he remained a poor half-pay
lieutenant, and the others were, as we have said, one of them a
lieutenant-colonel, and the other had a regiment. Such rises we often
see in life, without being able to give any satisfactory account of the
means, and therefore ascribe them to the good fortune of the person.

Both Colonel James and his brother-in-law were members of parliament;
for, as the uncle of the former had left him, together with his estate,
an almost certain interest in a borough, so he chose to confer this
favour on Colonel Bath; a circumstance which would have been highly
immaterial to mention here, but as it serves to set forth the goodness
of James, who endeavoured to make up in kindness to the family what he
wanted in fondness for his wife.

Colonel James then endeavoured all in his power to persuade Booth to
think again of a military life, and very kindly offered him his interest
towards obtaining him a company in the regiment under his command. Booth
must have been a madman, in his present circumstances, to have hesitated
one moment at accepting such an offer, and he well knew Amelia,
notwithstanding her aversion to the army, was much too wise to make
the least scruple of giving her consent. Nor was he, as it appeared
afterwards, mistaken in his opinion of his wife’s understanding; for
she made not the least objection when it was communicated to her, but
contented herself with an express stipulation, that wherever he was
commanded to go (for the regiment was now abroad) she would accompany
him.

Booth, therefore, accepted his friend’s proposal with a profusion of
acknowledgments; and it was agreed that Booth should draw up a memorial
of his pretensions, which Colonel James undertook to present to some man
of power, and to back it with all the force he had.

Nor did the friendship of the colonel stop here. “You will excuse me,
dear Booth,” said he, “if, after what you have told me” (for he had been
very explicit in revealing his affairs to him), “I suspect you must want
money at this time. If that be the case, as I am certain it must be, I
have fifty pieces at your service.” This generosity brought the tears
into Booth’s eyes; and he at length confest that he had not five guineas
in the house; upon which James gave him a bank-bill for twenty pounds,
and said he would give him thirty more the next time he saw him.

Thus did this generous colonel (for generous he really was to the
highest degree) restore peace and comfort to this little family; and
by this act of beneficence make two of the worthiest people two of the
happiest that evening.

Here, reader, give me leave to stop a minute, to lament that so few are
to be found of this benign disposition; that, while wantonness, vanity,
avarice, and ambition are every day rioting and triumphing in the
follies and weakness, the ruin and desolation of mankind, scarce one man
in a thousand is capable of tasting the happiness of others. Nay, give
me leave to wonder that pride, which is constantly struggling, and often
imposing on itself, to gain some little pre-eminence, should so seldom
hint to us the only certain as well as laudable way of setting ourselves
above another man, and that is, by becoming his benefactor.



