
_In which may appear that violence is sometimes done to the name of
love._


When that happy day came, in which unhallowed hands are forbidden to
contaminate the shoulders of the unfortunate, Booth went early to the
colonel’s house, and, being admitted to his presence, began with great
freedom, though with great gentleness, to complain of his not having
dealt with him with more openness. “Why, my dear colonel,” said he,
“would you not acquaint me with that secret which this letter hath
disclosed?” James read the letter, at which his countenance changed more
than once; and then, after a short silence, said, “Mr. Booth, I have
been to blame, I own it; and you upbraid me with justice. The true
reason was, that I was ashamed of my own folly. D--n me, Booth, if I
have not been a most consummate fool, a very dupe to this woman; and she
hath a particular pleasure in making me so. I know what the impertinence
of virtue is, and I can submit to it; but to be treated thus by a
whore--You must forgive me, dear Booth, but your success was a kind of
triumph over me, which I could not bear. I own, I have not the least
reason to conceive any anger against you; and yet, curse me if I should
not have been less displeased at your lying with my own wife; nay, I
could almost have parted with half my fortune to you more willingly than
have suffered you to receive that trifle of my money which you received
at her hands. However, I ask your pardon, and I promise you I will never
more think of you with the least ill-will on the account of this woman;
but as for her, d--n me if I do not enjoy her by some means or other,
whatever it costs me; for I am already above two hundred pounds out of
pocket, without having scarce had a smile in return.”

Booth exprest much astonishment at this declaration; he said he could
not conceive how it was possible to have such an affection for a woman
who did not shew the least inclination to return it. James gave her
a hearty curse, and said, “Pox of her inclination; I want only the
possession of her person, and that, you will allow, is a very fine one.
But, besides my passion for her, she hath now piqued my pride; for how
can a man of my fortune brook being refused by a whore?”--“Since you are
so set on the business,” cries Booth, “you will excuse my saying so, I
fancy you had better change your method of applying to her; for, as she
is, perhaps, the vainest woman upon earth, your bounty may probably do
you little service, nay, may rather actually disoblige her. Vanity is
plainly her predominant passion, and, if you will administer to that,
it will infallibly throw her into your arms. To this I attribute my own
unfortunate success. While she relieved my wants and distresses she was
daily feeding her own vanity; whereas, as every gift of yours asserted
your superiority, it rather offended than pleased her. Indeed, women
generally love to be of the obliging side; and, if we examine their
favourites, we shall find them to be much oftener such as they have
conferred obligations on than such as they have received them from.”

There was something in this speech which pleased the colonel; and he
said, with a smile, “I don’t know how it is, Will, but you know women
better than I.”--“Perhaps, colonel,” answered Booth, “I have studied
their minds more.”--“I don’t, however, much envy your knowledge,”
 replied the other, “for I never think their minds worth considering.
However, I hope I shall profit a little by your experience with Miss
Matthews. Damnation seize the proud insolent harlot! the devil take me
if I don’t love her more than I ever loved a woman!”

The rest of their conversation turned on Booth’s affairs. The colonel
again reassumed the part of a friend, gave him the remainder of the
money, and promised to take the first opportunity of laying his memorial
before a great man.

Booth was greatly overjoyed at this success. Nothing now lay on his
mind but to conceal his frailty from Amelia, to whom he was afraid Miss
Matthews, in the rage of her resentment, would communicate it. This
apprehension made him stay almost constantly at home; and he trembled
at every knock at the door. His fear, moreover, betrayed him into a
meanness which he would have heartily despised on any other occasion.
This was to order the maid to deliver him any letter directed to Amelia;
at the same time strictly charging her not to acquaint her mistress with
her having received any such orders.

A servant of any acuteness would have formed strange conjectures from
such an injunction; but this poor girl was of perfect simplicity; so
great, indeed, was her simplicity, that, had not Amelia been void of all
suspicion of her husband, the maid would have soon after betrayed her
master.

One afternoon, while they were drinking tea, little Betty, so was
the maid called, came into the room, and, calling her master forth,
delivered him a card which was directed to Amelia. Booth, having read
the card, on his return into the room chid the girl for calling him,
saying “If you can read, child, you must see it was directed to your
mistress.” To this the girl answered, pertly enough, “I am sure, sir,
you ordered me to bring every letter first to you.” This hint, with many
women, would have been sufficient to have blown up the whole affair;
but Amelia, who heard what the girl said, through the medium of love and
confidence, saw the matter in a much better light than it deserved, and,
looking tenderly on her husband, said, “Indeed, my love, I must blame
you for a conduct which, perhaps, I ought rather to praise, as it
proceeds only from the extreme tenderness of your affection. But why
will you endeavour to keep any secrets from me? believe me, for my own
sake, you ought not; for, as you cannot hide the consequences, you make
me always suspect ten times worse than the reality. While I have you and
my children well before my eyes, I am capable of facing any news which
can arrive; for what ill news can come (unless, indeed, it concerns my
little babe in the country) which doth not relate to the badness of our
circumstances? and those, I thank Heaven, we have now a fair prospect
of retrieving. Besides, dear Billy, though my understanding be much
inferior to yours, I have sometimes had the happiness of luckily hitting
on some argument which hath afforded you comfort. This, you know, my
dear, was the case with regard to Colonel James, whom I persuaded you to
think you had mistaken, and you see the event proved me in the right.”
 So happily, both for herself and Mr. Booth, did the excellence of this
good woman’s disposition deceive her, and force her to see everything in
the most advantageous light to her husband.

The card, being now inspected, was found to contain the compliments of
Mrs. James to Mrs. Booth, with an account of her being arrived in town,
and having brought with her a very great cold. Amelia was overjoyed at
the news of her arrival, and having drest herself in the utmost hurry,
left her children to the care of her husband, and ran away to pay her
respects to her friend, whom she loved with a most sincere affection.
But how was she disappointed when, eager with the utmost impatience, and
exulting with the thoughts of presently seeing her beloved friend, she
was answered at the door that the lady was not at home! nor could she,
upon telling her name, obtain any admission. This, considering the
account she had received of the lady’s cold, greatly surprized her; and
she returned home very much vexed at her disappointment.

Amelia, who had no suspicion that Mrs. James was really at home, and,
as the phrase is, was denied, would have made a second visit the next
morning, had she not been prevented by a cold which she herself now got,
and which was attended with a slight fever. This confined her several
days to her house, during which Booth officiated as her nurse, and never
stirred from her.

In all this time she heard not a word from Mrs. James, which gave her
some uneasiness, but more astonishment. The tenth day, when she was
perfectly recovered, about nine in the evening, when she and her husband
were just going to supper, she heard a most violent thundering at the
door, and presently after a rustling of silk upon her staircase; at the
same time a female voice cried out pretty loud, “Bless me! what, am I to
climb up another pair of stairs?” upon which Amelia, who well knew
the voice, presently ran to the door, and ushered in Mrs. James, most
splendidly drest, who put on as formal a countenance, and made as formal
a courtesie to her old friend, as if she had been her very distant
acquaintance.

Poor Amelia, who was going to rush into her friend’s arms, was struck
motionless by this behaviour; but re-collecting her spirits, as she had
an excellent presence of mind, she presently understood what the lady
meant, and resolved to treat her in her own way. Down therefore the
company sat, and silence prevailed for some time, during which Mrs.
James surveyed the room with more attention than she would have bestowed
on one much finer. At length the conversation began, in which the
weather and the diversions of the town were well canvassed. Amelia, who
was a woman of great humour, performed her part to admiration; so that a
by-stander would have doubted, in every other article than dress, which
of the two was the most accomplished fine lady.

After a visit of twenty minutes, during which not a word of any former
occurrences was mentioned, nor indeed any subject of discourse started,
except only those two above mentioned, Mrs. James rose from her chair
and retired in the same formal manner in which she had approached. We
will pursue her for the sake of the contrast during the rest of the
evening. She went from Amelia directly to a rout, where she spent two
hours in a croud of company, talked again and again over the diversions
and news of the town, played two rubbers at whist, and then retired
to her own apartment, where, having past another hour in undressing
herself, she went to her own bed.

Booth and his wife, the moment their companion was gone, sat down to
supper on a piece of cold meat, the remains of their dinner. After
which, over a pint of wine, they entertained themselves for a while with
the ridiculous behaviour of their visitant. But Amelia, declaring she
rather saw her as the object of pity than anger, turned the discourse
to pleasanter topics. The little actions of their children, the former
scenes and future prospects of their life, furnished them with many
pleasant ideas; and the contemplation of Amelia’s recovery threw Booth
into raptures. At length they retired, happy in each other.

It is possible some readers may be no less surprized at the behaviour of
Mrs. James than was Amelia herself, since they may have perhaps received
so favourable an impression of that lady from the account given of
her by Mr. Booth, that her present demeanour may seem unnatural and
inconsistent with her former character. But they will be pleased to
consider the great alteration in her circumstances, from a state of
dependency on a brother, who was himself no better than a soldier of
fortune, to that of being wife to a man of a very large estate and
considerable rank in life. And what was her present behaviour more
than that of a fine lady who considered form and show as essential
ingredients of human happiness, and imagined all friendship to consist
in ceremony, courtesies, messages, and visits? in which opinion, she
hath the honour to think with much the larger part of one sex, and no
small number of the other.



