
_Containing various matters._


A fortnight had now passed since Booth had seen or heard from the
colonel, which did not a little surprize him, as they had parted so good
friends, and as he had so cordially undertaken his cause concerning the
memorial on which all his hopes depended.

The uneasiness which this gave him farther encreased on finding that his
friend refused to see him; for he had paid the colonel a visit at nine
in the morning, and was told he was not stirring; and at his return back
an hour afterwards the servant said his master was gone out, of which
Booth was certain of the falsehood; for he had, during that whole hour,
walked backwards and forwards within sight of the colonel’s door, and
must have seen him if he had gone out within that time.

The good colonel, however, did not long suffer his friend to continue
in the deplorable state of anxiety; for, the very next morning, Booth
received his memorial enclosed in a letter, acquainting him that Mr.
James had mentioned his affair to the person he proposed, but that the
great man had so many engagements on his hands that it was impossible
for him to make any further promises at this time.

The cold and distant stile of this letter, and, indeed, the whole
behaviour of James, so different from what it had been formerly, had
something so mysterious in it, that it greatly puzzled and perplexed
poor Booth; and it was so long before he was able to solve it, that the
reader’s curiosity will, perhaps, be obliged to us for not leaving him
so long in the dark as to this matter. The true reason, then, of the
colonel’s conduct was this: his unbounded generosity, together with
the unbounded extravagance and consequently the great necessity of Miss
Matthews, had at length overcome the cruelty of that lady, with whom he
likewise had luckily no rival. Above all, the desire of being revenged
on Booth, with whom she was to the highest degree enraged, had,
perhaps, contributed not a little to his success; for she had no sooner
condescended to a familiarity with her new lover, and discovered that
Captain James, of whom she had heard so much from Booth, was no other
than the identical colonel, than she employed every art of which she was
mistress to make an utter breach of friendship between these two. For
this purpose she did not scruple to insinuate that the colonel was not
at all obliged to the character given of him by his friend, and to the
account of this latter she placed most of the cruelty which she had
shewn to the former.

Had the colonel made a proper use of his reason, and fairly examined
the probability of the fact, he could scarce have been imposed upon to
believe a matter so inconsistent with all he knew of Booth, and in which
that gentleman must have sinned against all the laws of honour without
any visible temptation. But, in solemn fact, the colonel was so
intoxicated with his love, that it was in the power of his mistress to
have persuaded him of anything; besides, he had an interest in giving
her credit, for he was not a little pleased with finding a reason for
hating the man whom he could not help hating without any reason,
at least, without any which he durst fairly assign even to himself.
Henceforth, therefore, he abandoned all friendship for Booth, and was
more inclined to put him out of the world than to endeavour any longer
at supporting him in it.

Booth communicated this letter to his wife, who endeavoured, as usual,
to the utmost of her power, to console him under one of the greatest
afflictions which, I think, can befal a man, namely, the unkindness of a
friend; but he had luckily at the same time the greatest blessing in
his possession, the kindness of a faithful and beloved wife. A blessing,
however, which, though it compensates most of the evils of life, rather
serves to aggravate the misfortune of distressed circumstances, from the
consideration of the share which she is to bear in them.

This afternoon Amelia received a second visit from Mrs. Ellison, who
acquainted her that she had a present of a ticket for the oratorio,
which would carry two persons into the gallery; and therefore begged the
favour of her company thither.

Amelia, with many thanks, acknowledged the civility of Mrs. Ellison, but
declined accepting her offer; upon which Booth very strenuously insisted
on her going, and said to her, “My dear, if you knew the satisfaction I
have in any of your pleasures, I am convinced you would not refuse the
favour Mrs. Ellison is so kind to offer you; for, as you are a lover of
music, you, who have never been at an oratorio, cannot conceive how
you will be delighted.” “I well know your goodness, my dear,” answered
Amelia, “but I cannot think of leaving my children without some person
more proper to take care of them than this poor girl.” Mrs. Ellison
removed this objection by offering her own servant, a very discreet
matron, to attend them; but notwithstanding this, and all she could say,
with the assistance of Booth, and of the children themselves, Amelia
still persisted in her refusal; and the mistress of the house, who knew
how far good breeding allows persons to be pressing on these occasions,
took her leave.

She was no sooner departed than Amelia, looking tenderly on her husband,
said, “How can you, my dear creature, think that music hath any charms
for me at this time? or, indeed, do you believe that I am capable of any
sensation worthy the name of pleasure when neither you nor my children
are present or bear any part of it?”

An officer of the regiment to which Booth had formerly belonged, hearing
from Atkinson where he lodged, now came to pay him a visit. He told him
that several of their old acquaintance were to meet the next Wednesday
at a tavern, and very strongly pressed him to be one of the company.
Booth was, in truth, what is called a hearty fellow, and loved now and
then to take a chearful glass with his friends; but he excused himself
at this time. His friend declared he would take no denial, and he
growing very importunate, Amelia at length seconded him. Upon this Booth
answered, “Well, my dear, since you desire me, I will comply, but on one
condition, that you go at the same time to the oratorio.” Amelia thought
this request reasonable enough, and gave her consent; of which Mrs.
Ellison presently received the news, and with great satisfaction.

It may perhaps be asked why Booth could go to the tavern, and not to the
oratorio with his wife? In truth, then, the tavern was within hallowed
ground, that is to say, in the verge of the court; for, of five officers
that were to meet there, three, besides Booth, were confined to that air
which hath been always found extremely wholesome to a broken military
constitution. And here, if the good reader will pardon the pun, he will
scarce be offended at the observation; since, how is it possible that,
without running in debt, any person should maintain the dress and
appearance of a gentleman whose income is not half so good as that of
a porter? It is true that this allowance, small as it is, is a great
expense to the public; but, if several more unnecessary charges were
spared, the public might, perhaps, bear a little encrease of this
without much feeling it. They would not, I am sure, have equal reason to
complain at contributing to the maintenance of a sett of brave fellows,
who, at the hazard of their health, their limbs, and their lives, have
maintained the safety and honour of their country, as when they find
themselves taxed to the support of a sett of drones, who have not the
least merit or claim to their favour, and who, without contributing in
any manner to the good of the hive, live luxuriously on the labours of
the industrious bee.



