
_In which Amelia, with her friend, goes to the oratorio._


Nothing happened between the Monday and the Wednesday worthy a place in
this history. Upon the evening of the latter the two ladies went to the
oratorio, and were there time enough to get a first row in the gallery.
Indeed, there was only one person in the house when they came; for
Amelia’s inclinations, when she gave a loose to them, were pretty eager
for this diversion, she being a great lover of music, and particularly
of Mr. Handel’s compositions. Mrs. Ellison was, I suppose, a great lover
likewise of music, for she was the more impatient of the two; which was
rather the more extraordinary; as these entertainments were not such
novelties to her as they were to poor Amelia.

Though our ladies arrived full two hours before they saw the back of
Mr. Handel, yet this time of expectation did not hang extremely heavy
on their hands; for, besides their own chat, they had the company of
the gentleman whom they found at their first arrival in the gallery,
and who, though plainly, or rather roughly dressed, very luckily for the
women, happened to be not only well-bred, but a person of very lively
conversation. The gentleman, on his part, seemed highly charmed with
Amelia, and in fact was so, for, though he restrained himself entirely
within the rules of good breeding, yet was he in the highest degree
officious to catch at every opportunity of shewing his respect, and
doing her little services. He procured her a book and wax-candle, and
held the candle for her himself during the whole entertainment.

At the end of the oratorio he declared he would not leave the ladies
till he had seen them safe into their chairs or coach; and at the same
time very earnestly entreated that he might have the honour of waiting
on them. Upon which Mrs. Ellison, who was a very good-humoured woman,
answered, “Ay, sure, sir, if you please; you have been very obliging to
us; and a dish of tea shall be at your service at any time;” and then
told him where she lived.

The ladies were no sooner seated in their hackney coach than Mrs.
Ellison burst into a loud laughter, and cried, “I’ll be hanged, madam,
if you have not made a conquest to-night; and what is very pleasant, I
believe the poor gentleman takes you for a single lady.” “Nay,” answered
Amelia very gravely, “I protest I began to think at last he was rather
too particular, though he did not venture at a word that I could be
offended at; but, if you fancy any such thing, I am sorry you invited
him to drink tea,” “Why so?” replied Mrs. Ellison. “Are you angry with a
man for liking you? if you are, you will be angry with almost every
man that sees you. If I was a man myself, I declare I should be in the
number of your admirers. Poor gentleman, I pity him heartily; he little
knows that you have not a heart to dispose of. For my own part, I should
not be surprized at seeing a serious proposal of marriage: for I am
convinced he is a man of fortune, not only by the politeness of his
address, but by the fineness of his linen, and that valuable diamond
ring on his finger. But you will see more of him when he comes to tea.”
 “Indeed I shall not,” answered Amelia, “though I believe you only rally
me; I hope you have a better opinion of me than to think I would go
willingly into the company of a man who had an improper liking for me.”
 Mrs. Ellison, who was one of the gayest women in the world, repeated the
words, improper liking, with a laugh; and cried, “My dear Mrs. Booth,
believe me, you are too handsome and too good-humoured for a prude. How
can you affect being offended at what I am convinced is the greatest
pleasure of womankind, and chiefly, I believe, of us virtuous women?
for, I assure you, notwithstanding my gaiety, I am as virtuous as any
prude in Europe.” “Far be it from me, madam,” said Amelia, “to suspect
the contrary of abundance of women who indulge themselves in much
greater freedoms than I should take, or have any pleasure in taking; for
I solemnly protest, if I know my own heart, the liking of all men, but
of one, is a matter quite indifferent to me, or rather would be highly
disagreeable.”

This discourse brought them home, where Amelia, finding her children
asleep, and her husband not returned, invited her companion to partake
of her homely fare, and down they sat to supper together. The clock
struck twelve; and, no news being arrived of Booth, Mrs. Ellison began
to express some astonishment at his stay, whence she launched into
a general reflexion on husbands, and soon passed to some particular
invectives on her own. “Ah, my dear madam,” says she, “I know the
present state of your mind, by what I have myself often felt formerly.
I am no stranger to the melancholy tone of a midnight clock. It was my
misfortune to drag on a heavy chain above fifteen years with a sottish
yoke-fellow. But how can I wonder at my fate, since I see even your
superior charms cannot confine a husband from the bewitching pleasures
of a bottle?” “Indeed, madam,” says Amelia, “I have no reason to
complain; Mr. Booth is one of the soberest of men; but now and then to
spend a late hour with his friend is, I think, highly excusable.” “O,
no doubt! “cries Mrs. Ellison, “if he can excuse himself; but if I was
a man--” Here Booth came in and interrupted the discourse. Amelia’s
eyes flashed with joy the moment he appeared; and he discovered no less
pleasure in seeing her. His spirits were indeed a little elevated
with wine, so as to heighten his good humour, without in the least
disordering his understanding, and made him such delightful company,
that, though it was past one in the morning, neither his wife nor Mrs.
Ellison thought of their beds during a whole hour.

Early the next morning the serjeant came to Mr. Booth’s lodgings, and
with a melancholy countenance acquainted him that he had been the night
before at an alehouse, where he heard one Mr. Murphy, an attorney,
declare that he would get a warrant backed against one Captain Booth at
the next board of greencloth. “I hope, sir,” said he, “your honour will
pardon me, but, by what he said, I was afraid he meant your honour; and
therefore I thought it my duty to tell you; for I knew the same thing
happen to a gentleman here the other day.”

Booth gave Mr. Atkinson many thanks for his information. “I doubt not,”
 said he, “but I am the person meant; for it would be foolish in me to
deny that I am liable to apprehensions of that sort.” “I hope, sir,”
 said the serjeant, “your honour will soon have reason to fear no man
living; but in the mean time, if any accident should happen, my bail is
at your service as far as it will go; and I am a housekeeper, and
can swear myself worth one hundred pounds.” Which hearty and friendly
declaration received all those acknowledgments from Booth which it
really deserved.

The poor gentleman was greatly alarmed at the news; but he was
altogether as much surprized at Murphy’s being the attorney employed
against him, as all his debts, except only to Captain James, arose in
the country, where he did not know that Mr. Murphy had any acquaintance.
However, he made no doubt that he was the person intended, and resolved
to remain a close prisoner in his own lodgings, till he saw the event
of a proposal which had been made him the evening before at the tavern,
where an honest gentleman, who had a post under the government, and who
was one of the company, had promised to serve him with the secretary at
war, telling him that he made no doubt of procuring him whole pay in
a regiment abroad, which in his present circumstances was very highly
worth his acceptance, when, indeed, that and a gaol seemed to be the
only alternatives that offered themselves to his choice.

Mr. Booth and his lady spent that afternoon with Mrs. Ellison--an
incident which we should scarce have mentioned, had it not been that
Amelia gave, on this occasion, an instance of that prudence which should
never be off its guard in married women of delicacy; for, before she
would consent to drink tea with Mrs. Ellison, she made conditions that
the gentleman who had met them at the oratorio should not be let in.
Indeed, this circumspection proved unnecessary in the present instance,
for no such visitor ever came; a circumstance which gave great content
to Amelia; for that lady had been a little uneasy at the raillery of
Mrs. Ellison, and had upon reflexion magnified every little compliment
made her, and every little civility shewn her by the unknown gentleman,
far beyond the truth. These imaginations now all subsided again; and she
imputed all that Mrs. Ellison had said either to raillery or mistake.

A young lady made a fourth with them at whist, and likewise stayed
the whole evening. Her name was Bennet. She was about the age of
five-and-twenty; but sickness had given her an older look, and had a
good deal diminished her beauty; of which, young as she was, she plainly
appeared to have only the remains in her present possession. She was
in one particular the very reverse of Mrs. Ellison, being altogether as
remarkably grave as the other was gay. This gravity was not, however,
attended with any sourness of temper; on the contrary, she had much
sweetness in her countenance, and was perfectly well bred. In short,
Amelia imputed her grave deportment to her ill health, and began to
entertain a compassion for her, which in good minds, that is to say, in
minds capable of compassion, is certain to introduce some little degree
of love or friendship.

Amelia was in short so pleased with the conversation of this lady, that,
though a woman of no impertinent curiosity, she could not help taking
the first opportunity of enquiring who she was. Mrs. Ellison said that
she was an unhappy lady, who had married a young clergyman for love,
who, dying of a consumption, had left her a widow in very indifferent
circumstances. This account made Amelia still pity her more, and
consequently added to the liking which she had already conceived for
her. Amelia, therefore, desired Mrs. Ellison to bring her acquainted
with Mrs. Bennet, and said she would go any day with her to make that
lady a visit. “There need be no ceremony,” cried Mrs. Ellison; “she is
a woman of no form; and, as I saw plainly she was extremely pleased with
Mrs. Booth, I am convinced I can bring her to drink tea with you any
afternoon you please.”

The two next days Booth continued at home, highly to the satisfaction of
his Amelia, who really knew no happiness out of his company, nor scarce
any misery in it. She had, indeed, at all times so much of his company,
when in his power, that she had no occasion to assign any particular
reason for his staying with her, and consequently it could give her
no cause of suspicion. The Saturday, one of her children was a little
disordered with a feverish complaint which confined her to her room,
and prevented her drinking tea in the afternoon with her husband in Mrs.
Ellison’s apartment, where a noble lord, a cousin of Mrs. Ellison’s,
happened to be present; for, though that lady was reduced in her
circumstances and obliged to let out part of her house in lodgings, she
was born of a good family and had some considerable relations.

His lordship was not himself in any office of state, but his fortune
gave him great authority with those who were. Mrs. Ellison, therefore,
very bluntly took an opportunity of recommending Booth to his
consideration. She took the first hint from my lord’s calling the
gentleman captain; to which she answered, “Ay, I wish your lordship
would make him so. It would be an act of justice, and I know it is
in your power to do much greater things.” She then mentioned Booth’s
services, and the wounds he had received at the siege, of which she had
heard a faithful account from Amelia. Booth blushed, and was as silent
as a young virgin at the hearing her own praises. His lordship answered,
“Cousin Ellison, you know you may command my interest; nay, I shall have
a pleasure in serving one of Mr. Booth’s character: for my part, I think
merit in all capacities ought to be encouraged, but I know the ministry
are greatly pestered with solicitations at this time. However, Mr. Booth
may be assured I will take the first opportunity; and in the mean time,
I shall be glad of seeing him any morning he pleases.” For all these
declarations Booth was not wanting in acknowledgments to the generous
peer any more than he was in secret gratitude to the lady who had shewn
so friendly and uncommon a zeal in his favour.

The reader, when he knows the character of this nobleman, may, perhaps,
conclude that his seeing Booth alone was a lucky circumstance, for he
was so passionate an admirer of women, that he could scarce have escaped
the attraction of Amelia’s beauty. And few men, as I have observed, have
such disinterested generosity as to serve a husband the better because
they are in love with his wife, unless she will condescend to pay a
price beyond the reach of a virtuous woman.

END OF VOL. I.





VOL. II.




BOOK V.


