
_Relating principally to the affairs of serjeant Atkinson._


The next day, when all the same company, Atkinson only excepted,
assembled in Amelia’s apartment, Mrs. Ellison presently began to
discourse of him, and that in terms not only of approbation but even of
affection. She called him her clever serjeant, and her dear serjeant,
repeated often that he was the prettiest fellow in the army, and said it
was a thousand pities he had not a commission; for that, if he had, she
was sure he would become a general.

“I am of your opinion, madam,” answered Booth; “and he hath got one
hundred pounds of his own already, if he could find a wife now to
help him to two or three hundred more, I think he might easily get
a commission in a marching regiment; for I am convinced there is no
colonel in the army would refuse him.”

“Refuse him, indeed!” said Mrs. Ellison; “no; he would be a very pretty
colonel that did. And, upon my honour, I believe there are very few
ladies who would refuse him, if he had but a proper opportunity of
soliciting them. The colonel and the lady both would be better off than
with one of those pretty masters that I see walking about, and dragging
their long swords after them, when they should rather drag their
leading-strings.”

“Well said,” cries Booth, “and spoken like a woman of spirit.--Indeed, I
believe they would be both better served.”

“True, captain,” answered Mrs. Ellison; “I would rather leave the two
first syllables out of the word gentleman than the last.”

“Nay, I assure you,” replied Booth, “there is not a quieter creature
in the world. Though the fellow hath the bravery of a lion, he hath the
meekness of a lamb. I can tell you stories enow of that kind, and so can
my dear Amelia, when he was a boy.”

“O! if the match sticks there,” cries Amelia, “I positively will not
spoil his fortune by my silence. I can answer for him from his infancy,
that he was one of the best-natured lads in the world. I will tell you
a story or two of him, the truth of which I can testify from my own
knowledge. When he was but six years old he was at play with me at my
mother’s house, and a great pointer-dog bit him through the leg. The
poor lad, in the midst of the anguish of his wound, declared he was
overjoyed it had not happened to miss (for the same dog had just before
snapt at me, and my petticoats had been my defence).--Another instance
of his goodness, which greatly recommended him to my father, and which I
have loved him for ever since, was this: my father was a great lover of
birds, and strictly forbad the spoiling of their nests. Poor Joe was one
day caught upon a tree, and, being concluded guilty, was severely lashed
for it; but it was afterwards discovered that another boy, a friend of
Joe’s, had robbed the nest of its young ones, and poor Joe had climbed
the tree in order to restore them, notwithstanding which, he submitted
to the punishment rather than he would impeach his companion. But, if
these stories appear childish and trifling, the duty and kindness he
hath shewn to his mother must recommend him to every one. Ever since he
hath been fifteen years old he hath more than half supported her: and
when my brother died, I remember particularly, Joe, at his desire, for
he was much his favourite, had one of his suits given him; but, instead
of his becoming finer on that occasion, another young fellow came to
church in my brother’s cloaths, and my old nurse appeared the same
Sunday in a new gown, which her son had purchased for her with the sale
of his legacy.”

“Well, I protest, he is a very worthy creature,” said Mrs. Bennet.

“He is a charming fellow,” cries Mrs. Ellison--“but then the name of
serjeant, Captain Booth; there, as the play says, my pride brings me off
again.”

          And whatsoever the sages charge on pride,
     The angels’ fall, and twenty other good faults beside;
     On earth I’m sure--I’m sure--something--calling
     Pride saves man, and our sex too, from falling.--

Here a footman’s rap at the door shook the room. Upon which Mrs.
Ellison, running to the window, cried out, “Let me die if it is not my
lord! what shall I do? I must be at home to him; but suppose he should
enquire for you, captain, what shall I say? or will you go down with
me?”

The company were in some confusion at this instant, and before they had
agreed on anything, Booth’s little girl came running into the room, and
said, “There was a prodigious great gentleman coming up-stairs.” She was
immediately followed by his lordship, who, as he knew Booth must be at
home, made very little or no enquiry at the door.

Amelia was taken somewhat at a surprize, but she was too polite to shew
much confusion; for, though she knew nothing of the town, she had had a
genteel education, and kept the best company the country afforded. The
ceremonies therefore past as usual, and they all sat down.

His lordship soon addressed himself to Booth, saying, “As I have what
I think good news for you, sir, I could not delay giving myself the
pleasure of communicating it to you. I have mentioned your affair
where I promised you, and I have no doubt of my success. One may easily
perceive, you know, from the manner of people’s behaving upon such
occasions; and, indeed, when I related your case, I found there was much
inclination to serve you. Great men, Mr. Booth, must do things in their
own time; but I think you may depend on having something done very
soon.”

Booth made many acknowledgments for his lordship’s goodness, and now a
second time paid all the thanks which would have been due, even had the
favour been obtained. This art of promising is the economy of a great
man’s pride, a sort of good husbandry in conferring favours, by which
they receive tenfold in acknowledgments for every obligation, I mean
among those who really intend the service; for there are others who
cheat poor men of their thanks, without ever designing to deserve them
at all.

This matter being sufficiently discussed, the conversation took a
gayer turn; and my lord began to entertain the ladies with some of
that elegant discourse which, though most delightful to hear, it is
impossible should ever be read.

His lordship was so highly pleased with Amelia, that he could not help
being somewhat particular to her; but this particularity distinguished
itself only in a higher degree of respect, and was so very polite, and
so very distant, that she herself was pleased, and at his departure,
which was not till he had far exceeded the length of a common visit,
declared he was the finest gentleman she had ever seen; with which
sentiment her husband and Mrs. Ellison both entirely concurred.

Mrs. Bennet, on the contrary, exprest some little dislike to my lord’s
complaisance, which she called excessive. “For my own part,” said she,
“I have not the least relish for those very fine gentlemen; what the
world generally calls politeness, I term insincerity; and I am more
charmed with the stories which Mrs. Booth told us of the honest serjeant
than with all that the finest gentlemen in the world ever said in their
lives!”

“O! to be sure,” cries Mrs. Ellison; “_All for Love, or the World well
Lost,_ is a motto very proper for some folks to wear in their coat of
arms; but the generality of the world will, I believe, agree with that
lady’s opinion of my cousin, rather than with Mrs. Bennet.”

Mrs. Bennet, seeing Mrs. Ellison took offence at what she said, thought
proper to make some apology, which was very readily accepted, and so
ended the visit.

We cannot however put an end to the chapter without observing that such
is the ambitious temper of beauty, that it may always apply to itself
that celebrated passage in Lucan,

_Nec quenquam jam ferre potest Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem._

Indeed, I believe, it may be laid down as a general rule, that no woman
who hath any great pretensions to admiration is ever well pleased in a
company where she perceives herself to fill only the second place. This
observation, however, I humbly submit to the judgment of the ladies, and
hope it will be considered as retracted by me if they shall dissent from
my opinion.



