
_Containing much heroic matter._


At the end of three days Mrs. Ellison’s friend had so far purchased Mr.
Booth’s liberty that he could walk again abroad within the verge without
any danger of having a warrant backed against him by the board before he
had notice. As for the ill-looked persons that had given the alarm, it
was now discovered that another unhappy gentleman, and not Booth, was
the object of their pursuit.

Mr. Booth, now being delivered from his fears, went, as he had formerly
done, to take his morning walk in the Park. Here he met Colonel Bath in
company with some other officers, and very civilly paid his respects to
him. But, instead of returning the salute, the colonel looked him full
in the face with a very stern countenance; and, if he could be said
to take any notice of him, it was in such a manner as to inform him he
would take no notice of him.

Booth was not more hurt than surprized at this behaviour, and resolved
to know the reason of it. He therefore watched an opportunity till the
colonel was alone, and then walked boldly up to him, and desired to know
if he had given him any offence? The colonel answered hastily, “Sir, I
am above being offended with you, nor do I think it consistent with my
dignity to make you any answer.” Booth replied, “I don’t know, sir, that
I have done anything to deserve this treatment.” “Look’ee, sir,” cries
the colonel, “if I had not formerly had some respect for you, I should
not think you worth my resentment. However, as you are a gentleman born,
and an officer, and as I have had an esteem for you, I will give you
some marks of it by putting it in your power to do yourself justice. I
will tell you therefore, sir, that you have acted like a scoundrel.” “If
we were not in the Park,” answered Booth warmly, “I would thank you very
properly for that compliment.” “O, sir,” cries the colonel, “we can be
soon in a convenient place.” Upon which Booth answered, he would attend
him wherever he pleased. The colonel then bid him come along, and
strutted forward directly up Constitution-hill to Hyde-park, Booth
following him at first, and afterwards walking before him, till they
came to that place which may be properly called the field of blood,
being that part, a little to the left of the ring, which heroes have
chosen for the scene of their exit out of this world.

Booth reached the ring some time before the colonel; for he mended not
his pace any more than a Spaniard. To say truth, I believe it was not
in his power: for he had so long accustomed himself to one and the same
strut, that as a horse, used always to trotting, can scarce be forced
into a gallop, so could no passion force the colonel to alter his pace.

[Illustration with caption: _Colonel Bath._]

At length, however, both parties arrived at the lists, where the colonel
very deliberately took off his wig and coat, and laid them on the grass,
and then, drawing his sword, advanced to Booth, who had likewise his
drawn weapon in his hand, but had made no other preparation for the
combat.

The combatants now engaged with great fury, and, after two or three
passes, Booth run the colonel through the body and threw him on the
ground, at the same time possessing himself of the colonel’s sword.

As soon as the colonel was become master of his speech, he called out
to Booth in a very kind voice, and said, “You have done my business,
and satisfied me that you are a man of honour, and that my brother James
must have been mistaken; for I am convinced that no man who will draw
his sword in so gallant a manner is capable of being a rascal. D--n
me, give me a buss, my dear boy; I ask your pardon for that infamous
appellation I dishonoured your dignity with; but d--n me if it was not
purely out of love, and to give you an opportunity of doing yourself
justice, which I own you have done like a man of honour. What may be the
consequence I know not, but I hope, at least, I shall live to reconcile
you with my brother.”

Booth shewed great concern, and even horror in his countenance. “Why, my
dear colonel,” said he, “would you force me to this? for Heaven’s sake
tell me what I have ever done to offend you.”

“Me!” cried the colonel. “Indeed, my dear child, you never did anything
to offend me.--Nay, I have acted the part of a friend to you in the
whole affair. I maintained your cause with my brother as long as decency
would permit; I could not flatly contradict him, though, indeed, I
scarce believed him. But what could I do? If I had not fought with you,
I must have been obliged to have fought with him; however, I hope what
is done will be sufficient, and that matters may be discomodated without
your being put to the necessity of fighting any more on this occasion.”

“Never regard me,” cried Booth eagerly; “for Heaven’s sake, think
of your own preservation. Let me put you into a chair, and get you a
surgeon.”

“Thou art a noble lad,” cries the colonel, who was now got on his legs,
“and I am glad the business is so well over; for, though your sword went
quite through, it slanted so that I apprehend there is little danger of
life: however, I think there is enough done to put an honourable end
to the affair, especially as you was so hasty to disarm me. I bleed a
little, but I can walk to the house by the water; and, if you will send
me a chair thither, I shall be obliged to you.”

As the colonel refused any assistance (indeed he was very able to walk
without it, though with somewhat less dignity than usual), Booth set
forward to Grosvenor-gate, in order to procure the chair, and soon
after returned with one to his friend; whom having conveyed into it,
he attended himself on foot into Bond-street, where then lived a very
eminent surgeon.

The surgeon having probed the wound, turned towards Booth, who was
apparently the guilty person, and said, with a smile, “Upon my word,
sir, you have performed the business with great dexterity.”

“Sir,” cries the colonel to the surgeon, “I would not have you imagine
I am afraid to die. I think I know more what belongs to the dignity of a
man; and, I believe, I have shewn it at the head of a line of battle. Do
not impute my concern to that fear, when I ask you whether there is or
is not any danger?”

“Really, colonel,” answered the surgeon, who well knew the complexion of
the gentleman then under his hands, “it would appear like presumption to
say that a man who hath been just run through the body is in no manner
of danger. But this I think I may assure you, that I yet perceive no
very bad symptoms, and, unless something worse should appear, or a
fever be the consequence, I hope you may live to be again, with all your
dignity, at the head of a line of battle.”

“I am glad to hear that is your opinion,” quoth the colonel, “for I am
not desirous of dying, though I am not afraid of it. But, if anything
worse than you apprehend should happen, I desire you will be a witness
of my declaration that this young gentleman is entirely innocent. I
forced him to do what he did. My dear Booth, I am pleased matters are as
they are. You are the first man that ever gained an advantage over me;
but it was very lucky for you that you disarmed me, and I doubt not but
you have the equananimity to think so. If the business, therefore, hath
ended without doing anything to the purpose, it was Fortune’s pleasure,
and neither of our faults.”

Booth heartily embraced the colonel, and assured him of the great
satisfaction he had received from the surgeon’s opinion; and soon after
the two combatants took their leave of each other. The colonel, after he
was drest, went in a chair to his lodgings, and Booth walked on foot to
his; where he luckily arrived without meeting any of Mr. Murphy’s gang;
a danger which never once occurred to his imagination till he was out of
it.

The affair he had been about had indeed so entirely occupied his mind,
that it had obliterated every other idea; among the rest, it caused
him so absolutely to forget the time of the day, that, though he had
exceeded the time of dining above two hours, he had not the least
suspicion of being at home later than usual.



