
_In which the reader will find matter worthy his consideration._


Amelia, having waited above an hour for her husband, concluded, as he
was the most punctual man alive, that he had met with some engagement
abroad, and sat down to her meal with her children; which, as it was
always uncomfortable in the absence of her husband, was very short;
so that, before his return, all the apparatus of dining was entirely
removed.

Booth sat some time with his wife, expecting every minute when the
little maid would make her appearance; at last, curiosity, I believe,
rather than appetite, made him ask how long it was to dinner? “To
dinner, my dear!” answered Amelia; “sure you have dined, I hope?” Booth
replied in the negative; upon which his wife started from her chair,
and bestirred herself as nimbly to provide him a repast as the most
industrious hostess in the kingdom doth when some unexpected guest of
extraordinary quality arrives at her house.

The reader hath not, I think, from any passages hitherto recorded in
this history, had much reason to accuse Amelia of a blameable curiosity;
he will not, I hope, conclude that she gave an instance of any such
fault when, upon Booth’s having so long overstayed his time, and so
greatly mistaken the hour of the day, and upon some other circumstances
of his behaviour (for he was too honest to be good at concealing any of
his thoughts), she said to him after he had done eating, “My dear, I am
sure something more than ordinary hath happened to-day, and I beg you
will tell me what is.”

Booth answered that nothing of any consequence had happened; that he
had been detained by a friend, whom he met accidently, longer than he
expected. In short, he made many shuffling and evasive answers, not
boldly lying out, which, perhaps, would have succeeded, but poorly and
vainly endeavouring to reconcile falsehood with truth; an attempt which
seldom fails to betray the most practised deceiver.

How impossible was it therefore for poor Booth to succeed in an art for
which nature had so entirely disqualified him. His countenance, indeed,
confessed faster than his tongue denied, and the whole of his behaviour
gave Amelia an alarm, and made her suspect something very bad had
happened; and, as her thoughts turned presently on the badness of their
circumstances, she feared some mischief from his creditors had befallen
him; for she was too ignorant of such matters to know that, if he had
fallen into the hands of the Philistines (which is the name given by the
faithful to bailiffs), he would hardly have been able so soon to recover
his liberty. Booth at last perceived her to be so uneasy, that, as
he saw no hopes of contriving any fiction to satisfy her, he thought
himself obliged to tell her the truth, or at least part of the truth,
and confessed that he had had a little skirmish with Colonel Bath, in
which, he said, the colonel had received a slight wound, not at all
dangerous; “and this,” says he, “is all the whole matter.” “If it be
so,” cries Amelia, “I thank Heaven no worse hath happened; but why, my
dear, will you ever converse with that madman, who can embrace a friend
one moment, and fight with him the next?” “Nay, my dear,” answered
Booth, “you yourself must confess, though he be a little too much on the
_qui vive,_ he is a man of great honour and good-nature.” “Tell me not,”
 replied she, “of such good-nature and honour as would sacrifice a
friend and a whole family to a ridiculous whim. Oh, Heavens!” cried she,
falling upon her knees, “from what misery have I escaped, from what have
these poor babes escaped, through your gracious providence this day!”
 Then turning to her husband, she cried, “But are you sure the monster’s
wound is no more dangerous than you say? a monster surely I may call
him, who can quarrel with a man that could not, that I am convinced
would not, offend him.”

Upon this question, Booth repeated the assurances which the surgeon
had given them, perhaps with a little enlargement, which pretty well
satisfied Amelia; and instead of blaming her husband for what he had
done, she tenderly embraced him, and again returned thanks to Heaven for
his safety.

In the evening Booth insisted on paying a short visit to the colonel,
highly against the inclination of Amelia, who, by many arguments and
entreaties, endeavoured to dissuade her husband from continuing an
acquaintance in which, she said, she should always foresee much danger
for the future. However, she was at last prevailed upon to acquiesce;
and Booth went to the colonel, whose lodgings happened to be in the
verge as well as his own.

He found the colonel in his night-gown, and his great chair, engaged
with another officer at a game of chess. He rose immediately, and,
having heartily embraced Booth, presented him to his friend, saying, he
had the honour to introduce to him as brave and as _fortitudinous_ a
man as any in the king’s dominions. He then took Booth with him into the
next room, and desired him not to mention a word of what had happened
in the morning; saying, “I am very well satisfied that no more hath
happened; however, as it ended in nothing, I could wish it might remain
a secret.” Booth told him he was heartily glad to find him so well, and
promised never to mention it more to any one.

The game at chess being but just begun, and neither of the parties
having gained any considerable advantage, they neither of them insisted
on continuing it; and now the colonel’s antagonist took his leave and
left the colonel and Booth together.

As soon as they were alone, the latter earnestly entreated the former to
acquaint him with the real cause of his anger; “for may I perish,” cries
Booth, “if I can even guess what I have ever done to offend either you,
or your brother. Colonel James.”

“Look’ee, child,” cries the colonel; “I tell you I am for my own part
satisfied; for I am convinced that a man who will fight can never be
a rascal; and, therefore, why should you enquire any more of me at
present? when I see my brother James, I hope to reconcile all matters,
and perhaps no more swords need be drawn on this occasion.” But Booth
still persisting in his desire, the colonel, after some hesitation,
with a tremendous oath, cried out, “I do not think myself at liberty to
refuse you after the indignity I offered you; so, since you demand it
of me, I will inform you. My brother told me you had used him
dishonourably, and had divellicated his character behind his back. He
gave me his word, too, that he was well assured of what he said. What
could I have done? though I own to you I did not believe him, and your
behaviour since hath convinced me I was in the right; I must either have
given him the lye, and fought with him, or else I was obliged to behave
as I did, and fight with you. And now, my lad, I leave it to you to do
as you please; but, if you are laid under any necessity to do yourself
further justice, it is your own fault.”

“Alas! colonel,” answered Booth, “besides the obligations I have to the
colonel, I have really so much love for him, that I think of nothing
less than resentment. All I wish is to have this affair brought to an
eclaircissement, and to satisfy him that he is in an error; for, though
his assertions are cruelly injurious, and I have never deserved them,
yet I am convinced he would not say what he did not himself think. Some
rascal, envious of his friendship for me, hath belyed me to him; and the
only resentment I desire is, to convince him of his mistake.”

At these words the colonel grinned horribly a ghastly smile, or rather
sneer, and answered, “Young gentleman, you may do as you please; but,
by the eternal dignity of man, if any man breathing had taken a liberty
with my character--Here, here--Mr. Booth (shewing his fingers), here
d--n me, should be his nostrils; he should breathe through my hands, and
breathe his last, d--n me.”

Booth answered, “I think, colonel, I may appeal to your testimony that I
dare do myself justice; since he who dare draw his sword against you can
hardly be supposed to fear any other person; but I repeat to you again
that I love Colonel James so well, and am so greatly obliged to him,
that it would be almost indifferent to me whether I directed my sword
against his breast or my own.”

The colonel’s muscles were considerably softened by Booth’s last speech;
but he again contracted them into a vast degree of fierceness before he
cried out--“Boy, thou hast reason enough to be vain; for thou art the
first person that ever could proudly say he gained an advantage over me
in combat. I believe, indeed, thou art not afraid of any man breathing,
and, as I know thou hast some obligations to my brother, I do not
discommend thee; for nothing more becomes the dignity of a man than
gratitude. Besides, as I am satisfied my brother can produce the author
of the slander--I say, I am satisfied of that--d--n me, if any man alive
dares assert the contrary; for that would be to make my brother himself
a liar--I will make him produce his author; and then, my dear boy, your
doing yourself proper justice there will bring you finely out of the
whole affair. As soon as my surgeon gives me leave to go abroad, which,
I hope, will be in a few days, I will bring my brother James to a tavern
where you shall meet us; and I will engage my honour, my whole dignity
to you, to make you friends.”

The assurance of the colonel gave Booth great pleasure; for few persons
ever loved a friend better than he did James; and as for doing military
justice on the author of that scandalous report which had incensed his
friend against him, not Bath himself was ever more ready, on such an
occasion, than Booth to execute it. He soon after took his leave, and
returned home in high spirits to his Amelia, whom he found in Mrs.
Ellison’s apartment, engaged in a party at ombre with that lady and her
right honourable cousin.

His lordship had, it seems, had a second interview with the great man,
and, having obtained further hopes (for I think there was not yet
an absolute promise) of success in Mr. Booth’s affairs, his usual
good-nature brought him immediately to acquaint Mr. Booth with it. As
he did not therefore find him at home, and as he met with the two ladies
together, he resolved to stay till his friend’s return, which he was
assured would not be long, especially as he was so lucky, he said, to
have no particular engagement that whole evening.

We remarked before that his lordship, at the first interview with
Amelia, had distinguished her by a more particular address from the
other ladies; but that now appeared to be rather owing to his perfect
good-breeding, as she was then to be considered as the mistress of the
house, than from any other preference. His present behaviour made this
still more manifest; for, as he was now in Mrs. Ellison’s apartment,
though she was his relation and an old acquaintance, he applied his
conversation rather more to her than to Amelia. His eyes, indeed, were
now and then guilty of the contrary distinction, but this was only by
stealth; for they constantly withdrew the moment they were discovered.
In short, he treated Amelia with the greatest distance, and at the same
time with the most profound and awful respect; his conversation was so
general, so lively, and so obliging, that Amelia, when she added to
his agreeableness the obligations she had to him for his friendship to
Booth, was certainly as much pleased with his lordship as any virtuous
woman can possibly be with any man, besides her own husband.



