
_Which will not appear, we presume, unnatural to all married readers._


If the table of poor Booth afforded but an indifferent repast to the
colonel’s hunger, here was most excellent entertainment of a much higher
kind. The colonel began now to wonder within himself at his not having
before discovered such incomparable beauty and excellence. This wonder
was indeed so natural that, lest it should arise likewise in the reader,
we thought proper to give the solution of it in the preceding chapter.

During the first two hours the colonel scarce ever had his eyes off from
Amelia; for he was taken by surprize, and his heart was gone before
he suspected himself to be in any danger. His mind, however, no sooner
suggested a certain secret to him than it suggested some degree of
prudence to him at the same time; and the knowledge that he had thoughts
to conceal, and the care of concealing them, had birth at one and the
same instant. During the residue of the day, therefore, he grew more
circumspect, and contented himself with now and then stealing a look by
chance, especially as the more than ordinary gravity of Booth made him
fear that his former behaviour had betrayed to Booth’s observation the
great and sudden liking he had conceived for his wife, even before he
had observed it in himself.

Amelia continued the whole day in the highest spirits and highest good
humour imaginable, never once remarking that appearance of discontent
in her husband of which the colonel had taken notice; so much more
quick-sighted, as we have somewhere else hinted, is guilt than
innocence. Whether Booth had in reality made any such observations on
the colonel’s behaviour as he had suspected, we will not undertake to
determine; yet so far may be material to say, as we can with sufficient
certainty, that the change in Booth’s behaviour that day, from what
was usual with him, was remarkable enough. None of his former vivacity
appeared in his conversation; and his countenance was altered from being
the picture of sweetness and good humour, not indeed to sourness or
moroseness, but to gravity and melancholy.

Though the colonel’s suspicion had the effect which we have mentioned on
his behaviour, yet it could not persuade him to depart. In short, he sat
in his chair as if confined to it by enchantment, stealing looks now and
then, and humouring his growing passion, without having command enough
over his limbs to carry him out of the room, till decency at last forced
him to put an end to his preposterous visit. When the husband and
wife were left alone together, the latter resumed the subject of her
children, and gave Booth a particular narrative of all that had passed
at his lordship’s, which he, though something had certainly disconcerted
him, affected to receive with all the pleasure he could; and this
affectation, however aukwardly he acted his part, passed very well on
Amelia; for she could not well conceive a displeasure of which she had
not the least hint of any cause, and indeed at a time when, from his
reconciliation with James, she imagined her husband to be entirely and
perfectly happy.

The greatest part of that night Booth past awake; and, if during the
residue he might be said to sleep, he could scarce be said to enjoy
repose; his eyes were no sooner closed, that he was pursued and haunted
by the most frightful and terrifying dreams, which threw him into so
restless a condition, that he soon disturbed his Amelia, and greatly
alarmed her with apprehensions that he had been seized by some dreadful
disease, though he had not the least symptoms of a fever by any
extraordinary heat, or any other indication, but was rather colder than
usual.

As Booth assured his wife that he was very well, but found no
inclination to sleep, she likewise bid adieu to her slumbers, and
attempted to entertain him with her conversation. Upon which his
lordship occurred as the first topic; and she repeated to him all the
stories which she had heard from Mrs. Ellison, of the peer’s goodness to
his sister and his nephew and niece. “It is impossible, my dear,” says
she, “to describe their fondness for their uncle, which is to me an
incontestible sign of a parent’s goodness.” In this manner she ran on
for several minutes, concluding at last, that it was pity so very few
had such generous minds joined to immense fortunes.

Booth, instead of making a direct answer to what Amelia had said, cried
coldly, “But do you think, my dear, it was right to accept all those
expensive toys which the children brought home? And I ask you again,
what return we are to make for these obligations?”

“Indeed, my dear,” cries Amelia, “you see this matter in too serious
a light. Though I am the last person in the world who would lessen his
lordship’s goodness (indeed I shall always think we are both infinitely
obliged to him), yet sure you must allow the expense to be a mere trifle
to such a vast fortune. As for return, his own benevolence, in the
satisfaction it receives, more than repays itself, and I am convinced he
expects no other.”

“Very well, my dear,” cries Booth, “you shall have it your way; I must
confess I never yet found any reason to blame your discernment; and
perhaps I have been in the wrong to give myself so much uneasiness on
this account.”

“Uneasiness, child!” said Amelia eagerly; “Good Heavens! hath this made
you uneasy?”

“I do own it hath,” answered Booth, “and it hath been the only cause of
breaking my repose.”

“Why then I wish,” cries Amelia, “all the things had been at the devil
before ever the children had seen them; and, whatever I may think
myself, I promise you they shall never more accept the value of
a farthing:--if upon this occasion I have been the cause of your
uneasiness, you will do me the justice to believe that I was totally
innocent.”

At those words Booth caught her in his arms, and with the tenderest
embrace, emphatically repeating the word innocent, cried, “Heaven forbid
I should think otherwise! Oh, thou art the best of creatures that ever
blessed a man!”

“Well, but,” said she, smiling, “do confess, my dear, the truth; I
promise you I won’t blame you nor disesteem you for it; but is not pride
really at the bottom of this fear of an obligation?”

“Perhaps it may,” answered he; “or, if you will, you may call it fear.
I own I am afraid of obligations, as the worst kind of debts; for I
have generally observed those who confer them expect to be repaid ten
thousand-fold.”

Here ended all that is material of their discourse; and a little time
afterwards, they both fell fast asleep in one another’s arms; from which
time Booth had no more restlessness, nor any further perturbation in his
dreams.

Their repose, however, had been so much disturbed in the former part
of the night, that, as it was very late before they enjoyed that sweet
sleep I have just mentioned, they lay abed the next day till noon, when
they both rose with the utmost chearfulness; and, while Amelia bestirred
herself in the affairs of her family, Booth went to visit the wounded
colonel.

He found that gentleman still proceeding very fast in his recovery, with
which he was more pleased than he had reason to be with his reception;
for the colonel received him very coldly indeed, and, when Booth told
him he had received perfect satisfaction from his brother, Bath erected
his head and answered with a sneer, “Very well, sir, if you think these
matters can be so made up, d--n me if it is any business of mine. My
dignity hath not been injured.”

“No one, I believe,” cries Booth, “dare injure it.”

“You believe so!” said the colonel: “I think, sir, you might be assured
of it; but this, at least, you may be assured of, that if any man did,
I would tumble him down the precipice of hell, d--n me, that you may be
assured of.”

As Booth found the colonel in this disposition, he had no great
inclination to lengthen out his visit, nor did the colonel himself seem
to desire it: so he soon returned back to his Amelia, whom he found
performing the office of a cook, with as much pleasure as a fine lady
generally enjoys in dressing herself out for a ball.



