
_Containing some matters not very unnatural._


Matters were scarce sooner reduced into order and decency than a violent
knocking was heard at the door, such indeed as would have persuaded
any one not accustomed to the sound that the madman was returned in the
highest spring-tide of his fury.

Instead, however, of so disagreeable an appearance, a very fine lady
presently came into the room, no other, indeed, than Mrs. James herself;
for she was resolved to shew Amelia, by the speedy return of her visit,
how unjust all her accusation had been of any failure in the duties of
friendship; she had, moreover, another reason to accelerate this visit,
and that was, to congratulate her friend on the event of the duel
between Colonel Bath and Mr. Booth.

The lady had so well profited by Mrs. Booth’s remonstrance, that she
had now no more of that stiffness and formality which she had worn on
a former occasion. On the contrary, she now behaved with the utmost
freedom and good-humour, and made herself so very agreeable, that Amelia
was highly pleased and delighted with her company.

An incident happened during this visit, that may appear to some too
inconsiderable in itself to be recorded; and yet, as it certainly
produced a very strong consequence in the mind of Mr. Booth, we cannot
prevail on ourselves to pass it by.

Little Emily, who was present in the room while Mrs. James was there,
as she stood near that lady happened to be playing with her watch, which
she was so greatly overjoyed had escaped safe from the madman. Mrs.
James, who exprest great fondness for the child, desired to see the
watch, which she commended as the prettiest of the kind she had ever
seen.

Amelia caught eager hold of this opportunity to spread the praises of
her benefactor. She presently acquainted Mrs. James with the donor’s
name, and ran on with great encomiums on his lordship’s goodness,
and particularly on his generosity. To which Mrs. James answered, “O!
certainly, madam, his lordship hath universally the character of being
extremely generous-where he likes.”

In uttering these words she laid a very strong emphasis on the three
last monosyllables, accompanying them at the same time with a very
sagacious look, a very significant leer, and a great flirt with her fan.

The greatest genius the world hath ever produced observes, in one of his
most excellent plays, that

     Trifles, light as air,
     Are to the jealous confirmations strong
     As proofs of holy writ.

That Mr. Booth began to be possessed by this worst of fiends, admits, I
think, no longer doubt; for at this speech of Mrs. James he immediately
turned pale, and, from a high degree of chearfulness, was all on a
sudden struck dumb, so that he spoke not another word till Mrs. James
left the room.

The moment that lady drove from the door Mrs. Ellison came up-stairs.
She entered the room with a laugh, and very plentifully rallied both
Booth and Amelia concerning the madman, of which she had received a full
account below-stairs; and at last asked Amelia if she could not guess
who it was; but, without receiving an answer, went on, saying, “For my
own part, I fancy it must be some lover of yours! some person that hath
seen you, and so is run mad with love. Indeed, I should not wonder if
all mankind were to do the same. La! Mr. Booth, what makes you grave?
why, you are as melancholy as if you had been robbed in earnest. Upon
my word, though, to be serious, it is a strange story, and, as the girl
tells it, I know not what to make of it. Perhaps it might be some rogue
that intended to rob the house, and his heart failed him; yet even that
would be very extraordinary. What, did you lose nothing, madam?”

“Nothing at all,” answered Amelia. “He did not even take the child’s
watch.”

“Well, captain,” cries Mrs. Ellison, “I hope you will take more care of
the house to-morrow; for your lady and I shall leave you alone to the
care of it. Here, madam,” said she, “here is a present from my lord to
us; here are two tickets for the masquerade at Ranelagh. You will be so
charmed with it! It is the sweetest of all diversions.”

“May I be damned, madam,” cries Booth, “if my wife shall go thither.”

Mrs. Ellison stared at these words, and, indeed, so did Amelia; for they
were spoke with great vehemence. At length the former cried out with an
air of astonishment, “Not let your lady go to Ranelagh, sir?”

“No, madam,” cries Booth, “I will not let my wife go to Ranelagh.”

“You surprize me!” cries Mrs. Ellison. “Sure, you are not in earnest?”

“Indeed, madam,” returned he, “I am seriously in earnest. And, what is
more, I am convinced she would of her own accord refuse to go.”

“Now, madam,” said Mrs. Ellison, “you are to answer for yourself: and
I will for your husband, that, if you have a desire to go, he will not
refuse you.”

“I hope, madam,” answered Amelia with great gravity, “I shall never
desire to go to any place contrary to Mr. Booth’s inclinations.”

“Did ever mortal hear the like?” said Mrs. Ellison; “you are enough to
spoil the best husband in the universe. Inclinations! what, is a woman
to be governed then by her husband’s inclinations, though they are never
so unreasonable?”

“Pardon me, madam,” said Amelia; “I will not suppose Mr. Booth’s
inclinations ever can be unreasonable. I am very much obliged to you for
the offer you have made me; but I beg you will not mention it any more;
for, after what Mr. Booth hath declared, if Ranelagh was a heaven upon
earth, I would refuse to go to it.”

“I thank you, my dear,” cries Booth; “I do assure you, you oblige me
beyond my power of expression by what you say; but I will endeavour to
shew you, both my sensibility of such goodness, and my lasting gratitude
to it.”

“And pray, sir,” cries Mrs. Ellison, “what can be your objection to your
lady’s going to a place which, I will venture to say, is as reputable as
any about town, and which is frequented by the best company?”

“Pardon me, good Mrs. Ellison,” said Booth: “as my wife is so good to
acquiesce without knowing my reasons, I am not, I think, obliged to
assign them to any other person.”

“Well,” cries Mrs. Ellison, “if I had been told this, I would not have
believed it. What, refuse your lady an innocent diversion, and that too
when you have not the pretence to say it would cost you a farthing?”

“Why will you say any more on this subject, dear madam?” cries Amelia.
“All diversions are to me matters of such indifference, that the bare
inclinations of any one for whom I have the least value would at all
times turn the balance of mine. I am sure then, after what Mr. Booth
hath said--”

“My dear,” cries he, taking her up hastily, “I sincerely ask your
pardon; I spoke inadvertently, and in a passion. I never once thought
of controuling you, nor ever would. Nay, I said in the same breath you
would not go; and, upon my honour, I meant nothing more.”

“My dear,” said she, “you have no need of making any apology. I am not
in the least offended, and am convinced you will never deny me what I
shall desire.”

“Try him, try him, madam,” cries Mrs. Ellison; “I will be judged by
all the women in town if it is possible for a wife to ask her husband
anything more reasonable. You can’t conceive what a sweet, charming,
elegant, delicious place it is. Paradise itself can hardly be equal to
it.”

“I beg you will excuse me, madam,” said Amelia; “nay, I entreat you will
ask me no more; for be assured I must and will refuse. Do let me desire
you to give the ticket to poor Mrs. Bennet. I believe it would greatly
oblige her.”

“Pardon me, madam,” said Mrs. Ellison; “if you will not accept of it, I
am not so distressed for want of company as to go to such a public
place with all sort of people neither. I am always very glad to see Mrs.
Bennet at my own house, because I look upon her as a very good sort of
woman; but I don’t chuse to be seen with such people in public places.”

Amelia exprest some little indignation at this last speech, which she
declared to be entirely beyond her comprehension; and soon after, Mrs.
Ellison, finding all her efforts to prevail on Amelia were ineffectual,
took her leave, giving Mr. Booth two or three sarcastical words, and a
much more sarcastical look, at her departure.



