
_A scene in which some ladies will possibly think Amelia’s conduct
exceptionable._


Booth and his wife being left alone, a solemn silence prevailed during
a few minutes. At last Amelia, who, though a good, was yet a human
creatures said to her husband, “Pray, my dear, do inform me what could
put you into so great a passion when Mrs. Ellison first offered me the
tickets for this masquerade?”

“I had rather you would not ask me,” said Booth. “You have obliged me
greatly in your ready acquiescence with my desire, and you will add
greatly to the obligation by not enquiring the reason of it. This you
may depend upon, Amelia, that your good and happiness are the great
objects of all my wishes, and the end I propose in all my actions. This
view alone could tempt me to refuse you anything, or to conceal anything
from you.”

“I will appeal to yourself,” answered she, “whether this be not using
me too much like a child, and whether I can possibly help being a little
offended at it?”

“Not in the least,” replied he; “I use you only with the tenderness of
a friend. I would only endeavour to conceal that from you which I think
would give you uneasiness if you knew. These are called the pious frauds
of friendship.”

“I detest all fraud,” says she; “and pious is too good an epithet to be
joined to so odious a word. You have often, you know, tried these frauds
with no better effect than to teize and torment me. You cannot imagine,
my dear, but that I must have a violent desire to know the reason of
words which I own I never expected to have heard. And the more you have
shown a reluctance to tell me, the more eagerly I have longed to know.
Nor can this be called a vain curiosity, since I seem so much interested
in this affair. If after all this, you still insist on keeping the
secret, I will convince you I am not ignorant of the duty of a wife by
my obedience; but I cannot help telling you at the same time you will
make me one of the most miserable of women.”

“That is,” cries he, “in other words, my dear Emily, to say, I will
be contented without the secret, but I am resolved to know it,
nevertheless.”

“Nay, if you say so,” cries she, “I am convinced you will tell me.
Positively, dear Billy, I must and will know.”

“Why, then, positively,” says Booth, “I will tell you. And I think I
shall then shew you that, however well you may know the duty of a wife,
I am not always able to behave like a husband. In a word then, my dear,
the secret is no more than this; I am unwilling you should receive any
more presents from my lord.”

“Mercy upon me!” cries she, with all the marks of astonishment; “what! a
masquerade ticket!”--

“Yes, my dear,” cries he; “that is, perhaps, the very worst and most
dangerous of all. Few men make presents of those tickets to ladies
without intending to meet them at the place. And what do we know of your
companion? To be sincere with you, I have not liked her behaviour for
some time. What might be the consequence of going with such a woman to
such a place, to meet such a person, I tremble to think. And now, my
dear, I have told you my reason of refusing her offer with some little
vehemence, and I think I need explain myself no farther.”

“You need not, indeed, sir,” answered she. “Good Heavens! did I ever
expect to hear this? I can appeal to heaven, nay, I will appeal to
yourself, Mr. Booth, if I have ever done anything to deserve such a
suspicion. If ever any action of mine, nay, if ever any thought, had
stained the innocence of my soul, I could be contented.”

“How cruelly do you mistake me!” said Booth. “What suspicion have I ever
shewn?”

“Can you ask it,” answered she, “after what you have just now declared?”

“If I have declared any suspicion of you,” replied he, “or if ever I
entertained a thought leading that way, may the worst of evils that
ever afflicted human nature attend me! I know the pure innocence of that
tender bosom, I do know it, my lovely angel, and adore it. The snares
which might be laid for that innocence were alone the cause of my
apprehension. I feared what a wicked and voluptuous man, resolved to
sacrifice everything to the gratification of a sensual appetite with the
most delicious repast, might attempt. If ever I injured the unspotted
whiteness of thy virtue in my imagination, may hell---”

“Do not terrify me,” cries she, interrupting him, “with such
imprecations. O, Mr. Booth! Mr. Booth! you must well know that a woman’s
virtue is always her sufficient guard. No husband, without suspecting
that, can suspect any danger from those snares you mention; and why,
if you are liable to take such things into your head, may not your
suspicions fall on me as well as on any other? for sure nothing was ever
more unjust, I will not say ungrateful, than the suspicions which you
have bestowed on his lordship. I do solemnly declare, in all the times
I have seen the poor man, he hath never once offered the least
forwardness. His behaviour hath been polite indeed, but rather
remarkably distant than otherwise. Particularly when we played at cards
together. I don’t remember he spoke ten words to me all the evening;
and when I was at his house, though he shewed the greatest fondness
imaginable to the children, he took so little notice of me, that a vain
woman would have been very little pleased with him. And if he gave them
many presents, he never offered me one. The first, indeed, which he ever
offered me was that which you in that kind manner forced me to refuse.”

“All this may be only the effect of art,” said Booth. “I am convinced
he doth, nay, I am convinced he must like you; and my good friend
James, who perfectly well knows the world, told me, that his lordship’s
character was that of the most profuse in his pleasures with women;
nay, what said Mrs. James this very evening? ‘His lordship is extremely
generous--where he likes.’ I shall never forget the sneer with which she
spoke those last words.”

“I am convinced they injure him,” cries Amelia. “As for Mrs. James, she
was always given to be censorious; I remarked it in her long ago, as her
greatest fault. And for the colonel, I believe he may find faults enow
of this kind in his own bosom, without searching after them among his
neighbours. I am sure he hath the most impudent look of all the men I
know; and I solemnly declare, the very last time he was here he put me
out of countenance more than once.”

“Colonel James,” answered Booth, “may have his faults very probably. I
do not look upon him as a saint, nor do I believe he desires I should;
but what interest could he have in abusing this lord’s character to me?
or why should I question his truth, when he assured me that my lord had
never done an act of beneficence in his life but for the sake of some
woman whom he lusted after?”

“Then I myself can confute him,” replied Amelia: “for, besides his
services to you, which, for the future, I shall wish to forget, and his
kindness to my little babes, how inconsistent is the character which
James gives of him with his lordship’s behaviour to his own nephew and
niece, whose extreme fondness of their uncle sufficiently proclaims his
goodness to them? I need not mention all that I have heard from Mrs.
Ellison, every word of which I believe; for I have great reason to
think, notwithstanding some little levity, which, to give her her due,
she sees and condemns in herself, she is a very good sort of woman.”

“Well, my dear,” cries Booth, “I may have been deceived, and I heartily
hope I am so; but in cases of this nature it is always good to be on the
surest side; for, as Congreve says,

              ‘The wise too jealous are: fools too secure.’”

Here Amelia burst into tears, upon which Booth immediately caught her in
his arms, and endeavoured to comfort her. Passion, however, for a while
obstructed her speech, and at last she cried, “O, Mr. Booth! can I bear
to hear the word jealousy from your mouth?”

“Why, my love,” said Booth, “will you so fatally misunderstand my
meaning? how often shall I protest that it is not of you, but of him,
that I was jealous? If you could look into my breast, and there read all
the most secret thoughts of my heart, you would not see one faint idea
to your dishonour.”

“I don’t misunderstand you, my dear,” said she, “so much as I am afraid
you misunderstand yourself. What is it you fear?--you mention not force,
but snares. Is not this to confess, at least, that you have some doubt
of my understanding? do you then really imagine me so weak as to be
cheated of my virtue?--am I to be deceived into an affection for a man
before I perceive the least inward hint of my danger? No, Mr. Booth,
believe me, a woman must be a fool indeed who can have in earnest such
an excuse for her actions. I have not, I think, any very high opinion
of my judgment, but so far I shall rely upon it, that no man breathing
could have any such designs as you have apprehended without my
immediately seeing them; and how I should then act I hope my whole
conduct to you hath sufficiently declared.”

“Well, my dear,” cries Booth, “I beg you will mention it no more; if
possible, forget it. I hope, nay, I believe, I have been in the wrong;
pray forgive me.”

“I will, I do forgive you, my dear,” said she, “if forgiveness be a
proper word for one whom you have rather made miserable than angry;
but let me entreat you to banish for ever all such suspicions from your
mind. I hope Mrs. Ellison hath not discovered the real cause of your
passion; but, poor woman, if she had, I am convinced it would go no
farther. Oh, Heavens! I would not for the world it should reach his
lordship’s ears. You would lose the best friend that ever man had. Nay,
I would not for his own sake, poor man; for I really believe it would
affect him greatly, and I must, I cannot help having an esteem for so
much goodness. An esteem which, by this dear hand,” said she, taking
Booth’s hand and kissing it, “no man alive shall ever obtain by making
love to me.”

Booth caught her in his arms and tenderly embraced her. After which the
reconciliation soon became complete; and Booth, in the contemplation of
his happiness, entirely buried all his jealous thoughts.



