
_A very short chapter, and consequently requiring no preface._


Mrs. Bennet having fastened the door, and both the ladies having taken
their places, she once or twice offered to speak, when passion stopt
her utterance; and, after a minute’s silence, she burst into a flood of
tears. Upon which Amelia, expressing the utmost tenderness for her, as
well by her look as by her accent, cried, “What can be the reason, dear
madam, of all this emotion?” “O, Mrs. Booth!” answered she, “I find I
have undertaken what I am not able to perform. You would not wonder at
my emotion if you knew you had an adulteress and a murderer now standing
before you.”

Amelia turned pale as death at these words, which Mrs. Bennet observing,
collected all the force she was able, and, a little composing her
countenance, cried, “I see, madam, I have terrified you with such
dreadful words; but I hope you will not think me guilty of these
crimes in the blackest degree.” “Guilty!” cries Amelia. “O Heavens!” “I
believe, indeed, your candour,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “will be readier
to acquit me than I am to acquit myself. Indiscretion, at least, the
highest, most unpardonable indiscretion, I shall always lay to ray own
charge: and, when I reflect on the fatal consequences, I can never,
never forgive myself.” Here she again began to lament in so bitter
a manner, that Amelia endeavoured, as much as she could (for she was
herself greatly shocked), to soothe and comfort her; telling her that,
if indiscretion was her highest crime, the unhappy consequences made
her rather an unfortunate than a guilty person; and concluded by
saying--“Indeed, madam, you have raised my curiosity to the highest
pitch, and I beg you will proceed with your story.”

Mrs. Bennet then seemed a second time going to begin her relation,
when she cried out, “I would, if possible, tire you with no more of my
unfortunate life than just with that part which leads to a catastrophe
in which I think you may yourself be interested; but I protest I am at a
loss where to begin.”

“Begin wherever you please, dear madam,” cries Amelia; “but I beg you
will consider my impatience.” “I do consider it,” answered Mrs. Bennet;
“and therefore would begin with that part of my story which leads
directly to what concerns yourself; for how, indeed, should my life
produce anything worthy your notice?” “Do not say so, madam,” cries
Amelia; “I assure you I have long suspected there were some very
remarkable incidents in your life, and have only wanted an opportunity
to impart to you my desire of hearing them: I beg, therefore, you would
make no more apologies.” “I will not, madam,” cries Mrs. Bennet, “and
yet I would avoid anything trivial; though, indeed, in stories of
distress, especially where love is concerned, many little incidents
may appear trivial to those who have never felt the passion, which, to
delicate minds, are the most interesting part of the whole.” “Nay, but,
dear madam,” cries Amelia, “this is all preface.”

“Well, madam,” answered Mrs. Bennet, “I will consider your impatience.”
 She then rallied all her spirits in the best manner she could, and began
as is written in the next chapter.

And here possibly the reader will blame Mrs. Bennet for taking her story
so far back, and relating so much of her life in which Amelia had no
concern; but, in truth, she was desirous of inculcating a good opinion
of herself, from recounting those transactions where her conduct was
unexceptionable, before she came to the more dangerous and suspicious
part of her character. This I really suppose to have been her intention;
for to sacrifice the time and patience of Amelia at such a season to the
mere love of talking of herself would have been as unpardonable in
her as the bearing it was in Amelia a proof of the most perfect good
breeding.



