
_Continuation of Mrs. Bennet’s story._


“I think, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, “I told you my father promised me
to enquire farther into the affair, but he had hardly time to keep his
word; for we separated pretty late in the evening and early the next
morning he was married to the widow.

“But, though he gave no credit to my information, I had sufficient
reason to think he did not forget it, by the resentment which he soon
discovered to both the persons whom I had named as my informers.

“Nor was it long before I had good cause to believe that my father’s new
wife was perfectly well acquainted with the good opinion I had of her,
not only from her usage of me, but from certain hints which she threw
forth with an air of triumph. One day, particularly, I remember she said
to my father, upon his mentioning his age, ‘O, my dear! I hope you have
many years yet to live! unless, indeed, I should be so cruel as to
break your heart’ She spoke these words looking me full in the face, and
accompanied them with a sneer in which the highest malice was visible,
under a thin covering of affected pleasantry.

“I will not entertain you, madam, with anything so common as the cruel
usage of a step-mother; nor of what affected me much more, the unkind
behaviour of a father under such an influence. It shall suffice only to
tell you that I had the mortification to perceive the gradual and
daily decrease of my father’s affection. His smiles were converted into
frowns; the tender appellations of child and dear were exchanged for
plain Molly, that girl, that creature, and sometimes much harder names.
I was at first turned all at once into a cypher, and at last seemed to
be considered as a nuisance in the family.

“Thus altered was the man of whom I gave you such a character at
the entrance on my story; but, alas! he no longer acted from his own
excellent disposition, but was in everything governed and directed by
my mother-in-law. In fact, whenever there is great disparity of years
between husband and wife, the younger is, I believe, always possessed
of absolute power over the elder; for superstition itself is a less firm
support of absolute power than dotage.

“But, though his wife was so entirely mistress of my father’s will that
she could make him use me ill, she could not so perfectly subdue his
understanding as to prevent him from being conscious of such ill-usage;
and from this consciousness, he began inveterately to hate me. Of this
hatred he gave me numberless instances, and I protest to you I know not
any other reason for it than what I have assigned; and the cause, as
experience hath convinced me, is adequate to the effect.

“While I was in this wretched situation, my father’s unkindness having
almost broken ray heart, he came one day into my room with more anger in
his countenance than I had ever seen, and, after bitterly upbraiding me
with my undutiful behaviour both to himself and his worthy consort, he
bid me pack up my alls, and immediately prepare to quit his house; at
the same time gave me a letter, and told me that would acquaint me where
I might find a home; adding that he doubted not but I expected, and had
indeed solicited, the invitation; and left me with a declaration that he
would have no spies in his family.

“The letter, I found on opening it, was from my father’s own sister;
but before I mention the contents I will give you a short sketch of her
character, as it was somewhat particular. Her personal charms were not
great; for she was very tall, very thin, and very homely. Of the
defect of her beauty she was, perhaps, sensible; her vanity, therefore,
retreated into her mind, where there is no looking-glass, and
consequently where we can flatter ourselves with discovering almost
whatever beauties we please. This is an encouraging circumstance; and
yet I have observed, dear Mrs. Booth, that few women ever seek these
comforts from within till they are driven to it by despair of finding
any food for their vanity from without. Indeed, I believe the first wish
of our whole sex is to be handsome.”

Here both the ladies fixed their eyes on the glass, and both smiled.

“My aunt, however,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “from despair of gaining any
applause this way, had applied herself entirely to the contemplation of
her understanding, and had improved this to such a pitch, that at the
age of fifty, at which she was now arrived, she had contracted a hearty
contempt for much the greater part of both sexes; for the women, as
being idiots, and for the men, as the admirers of idiots. That word, and
fool, were almost constantly in her mouth, and were bestowed with great
liberality among all her acquaintance.

“This lady had spent one day only at my father’s house in near two
years; it was about a month before his second marriage. At her departure
she took occasion to whisper me her opinion of the widow, whom she
called a pretty idiot, and wondered how her brother could bear such
company under his roof; for neither she nor I had at that time any
suspicion of what afterwards happened.

“The letter which my father had just received, and which was the first
she had sent him since his marriage, was of such a nature that I should
be unjust if I blamed him for being offended; fool and idiot were both
plentifully bestowed in it as well on himself as on his wife. But what,
perhaps, had principally offended him was that part which related to
me; for, after much panegyric on my understanding, and saying he was
unworthy of such a daughter, she considered his match not only as the
highest indiscretion as it related to himself, but as a downright act
of injustice to me. One expression in it I shall never forget. ‘You have
placed,’ said she, ‘a woman above your daughter, who, in understanding,
the only valuable gift of nature, is the lowest in the whole class of
pretty idiots.’ After much more of this kind, it concluded with inviting
me to her house.

“I can truly say that when I had read the letter I entirely forgave my
father’s suspicion that I had made some complaints to my aunt of his
behaviour; for, though I was indeed innocent, there was surely colour
enough to suspect the contrary.

“Though I had never been greatly attached to my aunt, nor indeed had
she formerly given me any reason for such an attachment, yet I was well
enough pleased with her present invitation. To say the truth, I led so
wretched a life where I then was, that it was impossible not to be a
gainer by any exchange.

“I could not, however, bear the thoughts of leaving my father with
an impression on his mind against me which I did not deserve. I
endeavoured, therefore, to remove all his suspicion of my having
complained to my aunt by the most earnest asseverations of my innocence;
but they were all to no purpose. All my tears, all my vows, and all
my entreaties were fruitless. My new mother, indeed, appeared to be
my advocate; but she acted her part very poorly, and, far from
counterfeiting any desire of succeeding in my suit, she could not
conceal the excessive joy which she felt on the occasion.

“Well, madam, the next day I departed for my aunt’s, where, after a long
journey of forty miles, I arrived, without having once broke my fast on
the road; for grief is as capable as food of filling the stomach, and I
had too much of the former to admit any of the latter. The fatigue of
my journey, and the agitation of my mind, joined to my fasting,
so overpowered my spirits, that when I was taken from my horse I
immediately fainted away in the arms of the man who helped me from
my saddle. My aunt expressed great astonishment at seeing me in this
condition, with my eyes almost swollen out of my head with tears; but
my father’s letter, which I delivered her soon after I came to myself,
pretty well, I believe, cured her surprize. She often smiled with a
mixture of contempt and anger while she was reading it; and, having
pronounced her brother to be a fool, she turned to me, and, with as much
affability as possible (for she is no great mistress of affability),
said, ‘Don’t be uneasy, dear Molly, for you are come to the house of a
friend--of one who hath sense enough to discern the author of all the
mischief: depend upon it, child, I will, ere long, make some people
ashamed of their folly.’ This kind reception gave me some comfort, my
aunt assuring me that she would convince him how unjustly he had accused
me of having made any complaints to her. A paper war was now begun
between these two, which not only fixed an irreconcileable hatred
between them, but confirmed my father’s displeasure against me; and, in
the end, I believe, did me no service with my aunt; for I was
considered by both as the cause of their dissension, though, in fact,
my stepmother, who very well knew the affection my aunt had for her,
had long since done her business with my father; and as for my aunt’s
affection towards him, it had been abating several years, from
an apprehension that he did not pay sufficient deference to her
understanding.

“I had lived about half a year with my aunt when I heard of my
stepmother’s being delivered of a boy, and the great joy my father
expressed on that occasion; but, poor man, he lived not long to enjoy
his happiness; for within a month afterwards I had the melancholy news
of his death.

“Notwithstanding all the disobligations I had lately received from him,
I was sincerely afflicted at my loss of him. All his kindness to me in
my infancy, all his kindness to me while I was growing up, recurred
to my memory, raised a thousand tender, melancholy ideas, and totally
obliterated all thoughts of his latter behaviour, for which I made also
every allowance and every excuse in my power.

“But what may perhaps appear more extraordinary, my aunt began soon to
speak of him with concern. She said he had some understanding formerly,
though his passion for that vile woman had, in a great measure, obscured
it; and one day, when she was in an ill-humour with me, she had the
cruelty to throw out a hint that she had never quarrelled with her
brother if it had not been on my account.” My father, during his life,
had allowed my aunt very handsomely for my board; for generosity was too
deeply riveted in his nature to be plucked out by all the power of his
wife. So far, however, she prevailed, that, though he died possessed of
upwards of L2000, he left me no more than L100, which, as he expressed
in his will, was to set me up in some business, if I had the grace to
take to any.

“Hitherto my aunt had in general treated me with some degree of
affection; but her behaviour began now to be changed. She soon took an
opportunity of giving me to understand that her fortune was insufficient
to keep me; and, as I could not live on the interest of my own, it was
high time for me to consider about going into the world. She added, that
her brother having mentioned my setting up in some business in his will
was very foolish; that I had been bred to nothing; and, besides, that
the sum was too trifling to set me up in any way of reputation; she
desired me therefore to think of immediately going into service.

“This advice was perhaps right enough; and I told her I was very ready
to do as she directed me, but I was at that time in an ill state of
health; I desired her therefore to let me stay with her till my legacy,
which was not to be paid till a year after my father’s death, was due;
and I then promised to satisfy her for my board, to which she readily
consented.

“And now, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, sighing, “I am going to open to you
those matters which lead directly to that great catastrophe of my life
which hath occasioned my giving you this trouble, and of trying your
patience in this manner.”

Amelia, notwithstanding her impatience, made a very civil answer to
this; and then Mrs. Bennet proceeded to relate what is written in the
next chapter.



