
_The story of Mrs. Bennet continued._


I scarce know where I left off--Oh! I was, I think, telling you that I
esteemed my aunt as my rival; and it is not easy to conceive a greater
degree of detestation than I had for her; and what may, perhaps,
appear strange, as she daily grew more and more civil to me, my hatred
encreased with her civility; for I imputed it all to her triumph over
me, and to her having secured, beyond all apprehension, the heart I
longed for.

“How was I surprized when, one day, with as much good-humour as she was
mistress of (for her countenance was not very pleasing), she asked me
how I liked Mr. Bennet? The question, you will believe, madam, threw me
into great confusion, which she plainly perceived, and, without waiting
for my answer, told me she was very well satisfied, for that it did not
require her discernment to read my thoughts in my countenance. ‘Well,
child,’ she said, ‘I have suspected this a great while, and I believe it
will please you to know that I yesterday made the same discovery in your
lover.’ This, I confess to you, was more than I could well bear, and
I begged her to say no more to me at that time on that subject. ‘Nay,
child,’ answered she, ‘I must tell you all, or I should not act a
friendly part. Mr. Bennet, I am convinced, hath a passion for you; but
it is a passion which, I think, you should not encourage. For, to be
plain with you, I fear he is in love with your person only. Now this
is a love, child, which cannot produce that rational happiness which a
woman of sense ought to expect.’ In short, she ran on with a great deal
of stuff about rational happiness, and women of sense, and concluded
with assuring me that, after the strictest scrutiny, she could not find
that Mr. Bennet had an adequate opinion of my understanding; upon which
she vouchsafed to make me many compliments, but mixed with several
sarcasms concerning my learning.

“I hope, madam, however,” said she to Amelia, “you have not so bad an
opinion of my capacity as to imagine me dull enough to be offended with
Mr. Bennet’s sentiments, for which I presently knew so well to account.
I was, indeed, charmed with his ingenuity, who had discovered, perhaps,
the only way of reconciling my aunt to those inclinations which I now
assured myself he had for me.

“I was not long left to support my hopes by my sagacity. He soon found
an opportunity of declaring his passion. He did this in so forcible
though gentle a manner, with such a profusion of fervency and tenderness
at once, that his love, like a torrent, bore everything before it; and
I am almost ashamed to own to you how very soon he prevailed upon me
to--to--in short, to be an honest woman, and to confess to him the plain
truth.

“When we were upon a good footing together he gave me a long relation
of what had past at several interviews with my aunt, at which I had
not been present. He said he had discovered that, as she valued herself
chiefly on her understanding, so she was extremely jealous of mine,
and hated me on account of my learning. That, as he had loved me
passionately from his first seeing me, and had thought of nothing from
that time but of throwing himself at my feet, he saw no way so open to
propitiate my aunt as that which he had taken by commending my beauty,
a perfection to which she had long resigned all claim, at the expense of
my understanding, in which he lamented my deficiency to a degree almost
of ridicule. This he imputed chiefly to my learning; on this occasion he
advanced a sentiment which so pleased my aunt that she thought proper to
make it her own; for I heard it afterwards more than once from her own
mouth. Learning, he said, had the same effect on the mind that strong
liquors have on the constitution; both tending to eradicate all our
natural fire and energy. His flattery had made such a dupe of my aunt
that she assented, without the least suspicion of his sincerity, to
all he said; so sure is vanity to weaken every fortress of the
understanding, and to betray us to every attack of the enemy.

“You will believe, madam, that I readily forgave him all he had said,
not only from that motive which I have mentioned, but as I was assured
he had spoke the reverse of his real sentiments. I was not, however,
quite so well pleased with my aunt, who began to treat me as if I was
really an idiot. Her contempt, I own, a little piqued me; and I could
not help often expressing my resentment, when we were alone together,
to Mr. Bennet, who never failed to gratify me by making her conceit
the subject of his wit; a talent which he possessed in the most
extraordinary degree.

“This proved of very fatal consequence; for one day, while we were
enjoying my aunt in a very thick arbour in the garden, she stole upon us
unobserved, and overheard our whole conversation. I wish, my dear, you
understood Latin, that I might repeat you a sentence in which the rage
of a tigress that hath lost her young is described. No English poet,
as I remember, hath come up to it; nor am I myself equal to the
undertaking. She burst in upon us, open-mouthed, and after discharging
every abusive word almost, in the only language she understood, on poor
Mr. Bennet, turned us both out of doors, declaring she would send my
rags after me, but would never more permit me to set my foot within her
threshold.

“Consider, dear madam, to what a wretched condition we were now reduced.
I had not yet received the small legacy left me by my father; nor was
Mr. Bennet master of five pounds in the whole world.

“In this situation, the man I doated on to distraction had but little
difficulty to persuade me to a proposal which, indeed, I thought
generous in him to make, as it seemed to proceed from that tenderness
for my reputation to which he ascribed it; indeed, it could proceed from
no motive with which I should have been displeased. In a word, within
two days we were man and wife.

“Mr. Bennet now declared himself the happiest of men; and, for my part,
I sincerely declared I envied no woman upon earth. How little, alas! did
I then know or suspect the price I was to pay for all my joys! A match
of real love is, indeed, truly paradise; and such perfect happiness
seems to be the forbidden fruit to mortals, which we are to lament
having tasted during the rest of our lives.

“The first uneasiness which attacked us after our marriage was on my
aunt’s account. It was very disagreeable to live under the nose of so
near a relation, who did not acknowledge us, but on the contrary, was
ever doing us all the ill turns in her power, and making a party against
us in the parish, which is always easy enough to do amongst the vulgar
against persons who are their superiors in rank, and, at the same time,
their inferiors in fortune. This made Mr. Bennet think of procuring an
exchange, in which intention he was soon after confirmed by the arrival
of the rector. It was the rector’s custom to spend three months every
year at his living, for which purpose he reserved an apartment in
his parsonage-house, which was full large enough for two such little
families as then occupied it. We at first promised ourselves some little
convenience from his boarding with us; and Mr. Bennet began to lay aside
his thoughts of leaving his curacy, at least for some time. But these
golden ideas presently vanished; for, though we both used our utmost
endeavours to please him, we soon found the impossibility of succeeding.
He was, indeed, to give you his character in a word, the most peevish
of mortals. This temper, notwithstanding that he was both a good and
a pious man, made his company so insufferable that nothing could
compensate it. If his breakfast was not ready to a moment--if a dish of
meat was too much or too little done--in short, if anything failed of
exactly hitting his taste, he was sure to be out of humour all that
day, so that, indeed, he was scarce ever in a good temper a whole day
together; for fortune seems to take a delight in thwarting this kind of
disposition, to which human life, with its many crosses and accidents,
is, in truth, by no means fitted.

“Mr. Bennet was now, by my desire as well as his own, determined to
quit the parish; but when he attempted to get an exchange, he found it
a matter of more difficulty than he had apprehended; for the rector’s
temper was so well known among the neighbouring clergy, that none of
them could be brought to think of spending three months in a year with
him.

“After many fruitless enquiries, Mr. Bennet thought best to remove to
London, the great mart of all affairs, ecclesiastical and civil. This
project greatly pleased him, and he resolved, without more delay, to
take his leave of the rector, which he did in the most friendly manner
possible, and preached his farewell sermon; nor was there a dry eye
in the church, except among the few, whom my aunt, who remained still
inexorable, had prevailed upon to hate us without any cause.

“To London we came, and took up our lodging the first night at the inn
where the stage-coach set us down: the next morning my husband went out
early on his business, and returned with the good news of having heard
of a curacy, and of having equipped himself with a lodging in
the neighbourhood of a worthy peer, ‘who,’ said he, ‘was my
fellow-collegiate; and, what is more, I have a direction to a person who
will advance your legacy at a very reasonable rate.’

“This last particular was extremely agreeable to me, for our last guinea
was now broached; and the rector had lent my husband ten pounds to pay
his debts in the country, for, with all his peevishness, he was a good
and a generous man, and had, indeed, so many valuable qualities, that I
lamented his temper, after I knew him thoroughly, as much on his account
as on my own.

“We now quitted the inn and went to our lodgings, where my husband
having placed me in safety, as he said, he went about the business of
the legacy with good assurance of success.

“My husband returned elated with his success, the person to whom he
applied having undertaken to advance the legacy, which he fulfilled
as soon as the proper enquiries could be made, and proper instruments
prepared for that purpose.

“This, however, took up so much time, that, as our fund was so very
low, we were reduced to some distress, and obliged to live extremely
penurious; nor would all do without my taking a most disagreeable way of
procuring money by pawning one of my gowns.

“Mr. Bennet was now settled in a curacy in town, greatly to his
satisfaction, and our affairs seemed to have a prosperous aspect, when
he came home to me one morning in much apparent disorder, looking as
pale as death, and begged me by some means or other to get him a dram,
for that he was taken with a sudden faintness and lowness of spirits.

“Frighted as I was, I immediately ran downstairs, and procured some rum
of the mistress of the house; the first time, indeed, I ever knew him
drink any. When he came to himself he begged me not to be alarmed, for
it was no distemper, but something that had vexed him, which had caused
his disorder, which he had now perfectly recovered.

“He then told me the whole affair. He had hitherto deferred paying
a visit to the lord whom I mentioned to have been formerly his
fellow-collegiate, and was now his neighbour, till he could put himself
in decent rigging. He had now purchased a new cassock, hat, and wig, and
went to pay his respects to his old acquaintance, who had received from
him many civilities and assistances in his learning at the university,
and had promised to return them fourfold hereafter.

“It was not without some difficulty that Mr. Bennet got into the
antechamber. Here he waited, or as the phrase is, cooled his heels, for
above an hour before he saw his lordship; nor had he seen him then but
by an accident; for my lord was going out when he casually intercepted
him in his passage to his chariot. He approached to salute him with some
familiarity, though with respect, depending on his former intimacy, when
my lord, stepping short, very gravely told him he had not the pleasure
of knowing him. How! my lord, said he, can you have so soon forgot your
old acquaintance Tom Bennet? O, Mr. Bennet! cries his lordship, with
much reserve, is it you? you will pardon my memory. I am glad to see
you, Mr. Bennet, but you must excuse me at present, for I am in very
great haste. He then broke from him, and without more ceremony, or any
further invitation, went directly into his chariot.

“This cold reception from a person for whom my husband had a real
friendship, and from whom he had great reason to expect a very warm
return of affection, so affected the poor man, that it caused all those
symptoms which I have mentioned before.

“Though this incident produced no material consequence, I could not pass
it over in silence, as, of all the misfortunes which ever befel him, it
affected my husband the most. I need not, however, to a woman of your
delicacy, make any comments on a behaviour which, though I believe it is
very common, is, nevertheless, cruel and base beyond description, and is
diametrically opposite to true honour as well as to goodness.

“To relieve the uneasiness which my husband felt on account of his false
friend, I prevailed with him to go every night, almost for a fortnight
together, to the play; a diversion of which he was greatly fond, and
from which he did not think his being a clergyman excluded him; indeed,
it is very well if those austere persons who would be inclined to
censure him on this head have themselves no greater sins to answer for.

“From this time, during three months, we past our time very agreeably,
a little too agreeably perhaps for our circumstances; for, however
innocent diversions may be in other respects, they must be owned to
be expensive. When you consider then, madam, that our income from the
curacy was less than forty pounds a year, and that, after payment of the
debt to the rector, and another to my aunt, with the costs in law which
she had occasioned by suing for it, my legacy was reduced to less than
seventy pounds, you will not wonder that, in diversions, cloaths, and
the common expenses of life, we had almost consumed our whole stock.

“The inconsiderate manner in which we had lived for some time will, I
doubt not, appear to you to want some excuse; but I have none to make
for it. Two things, however, now happened, which occasioned much serious
reflexion to Mr. Bennet; the one was, that I grew near my time; the
other, that he now received a letter from Oxford, demanding the debt
of forty pounds which I mentioned to you before. The former of these
he made a pretence of obtaining a delay for the payment of the latter,
promising, in two months, to pay off half the debt, by which means he
obtained a forbearance during that time.

“I was now delivered of a son, a matter which should in reality have
encreased our concern, but, on the contrary, it gave us great pleasure;
greater indeed could not have been conceived at the birth of an heir
to the most plentiful estate: so entirely thoughtless were we, and so
little forecast had we of those many evils and distresses to which we
had rendered a human creature, and one so dear to us, liable. The day
of a christening is, in all families, I believe, a day of jubilee and
rejoicing; and yet, if we consider the interest of that little wretch
who is the occasion, how very little reason would the most sanguine
persons have for their joy!

“But, though our eyes were too weak to look forward, for the sake of
our child, we could not be blinded to those dangers that immediately
threatened ourselves. Mr. Bennet, at the expiration of the two months,
received a second letter from Oxford, in a very peremptory stile, and
threatening a suit without any farther delay. This alarmed us in the
strongest manner; and my husband, to secure his liberty, was advised for
a while to shelter himself in the verge of the court.

“And, now, madam, I am entering on that scene which directly leads to
all my misery.”--Here she stopped, and wiped her eyes; and then, begging
Amelia to excuse her for a few minutes, ran hastily out of the room,
leaving Amelia by herself, while she refreshed her spirits with a
cordial to enable her to relate what follows in the next chapter.



