
_The story farther continued._


Mrs. Bennet proceeded thus:

“I was at length prevailed on to accompany Mrs. Ellison to the
masquerade. Here, I must confess, the pleasantness of the place, the
variety of the dresses, and the novelty of the thing, gave me much
delight, and raised my fancy to the highest pitch. As I was entirely
void of all suspicion, my mind threw off all reserve, and pleasure only
filled my thoughts. Innocence, it is true, possessed my heart; but it
was innocence unguarded, intoxicated with foolish desires, and liable
to every temptation. During the first two hours we had many trifling
adventures not worth remembering. At length my lord joined us, and
continued with me all the evening; and we danced several dances
together.

“I need not, I believe, tell you, madam, how engaging his conversation
is. I wish I could with truth say I was not pleased with it; or, at
least, that I had a right to be pleased with it. But I will disguise
nothing from you. I now began to discover that he had some affection
for me, but he had already too firm a footing in my esteem to make the
discovery shocking. I will--I will own the truth; I was delighted with
perceiving a passion in him, which I was not unwilling to think he had
had from the beginning, and to derive his having concealed it so long
from his awe of my virtue, and his respect to my understanding. I assure
you, madam, at the same time, my intentions were never to exceed the
bounds of innocence. I was charmed with the delicacy of his passion;
and, in the foolish thoughtless turn of mind in which I then was, I
fancied I might give some very distant encouragement to such a passion
in such a man with the utmost safety--that I might indulge my vanity and
interest at once, without being guilty of the least injury.

“I know Mrs. Booth will condemn all these thoughts, and I condemn them
no less myself; for it is now my stedfast opinion that the woman who
gives up the least outwork of her virtue doth, in that very moment,
betray the citadel.

“About two o’clock we returned home, and found a very handsome collation
provided for us. I was asked to partake of it, and I did not, I could
not refuse. I was not, however, entirely void of all suspicion, and I
made many resolutions; one of which was, not to drink a drop more than
my usual stint. This was, at the utmost, little more than half a pint of
small punch.

“I adhered strictly to my quantity; but in the quality I am convinced I
was deceived; for before I left the room I found my head giddy. What the
villain gave me I know not; but, besides being intoxicated, I perceived
effects from it which are not to be described.

“Here, madam, I must draw a curtain over the residue of that fatal
night. Let it suffice that it involved me in the most dreadful ruin;
a ruin to which I can truly say I never consented, and of which I was
scarce conscious when the villanous man avowed it to my face in the
morning.

“Thus I have deduced my story to the most horrid period; happy had I
been had this been the period of my life, but I was reserved for greater
miseries; but before I enter on them I will mention something very
remarkable, with which I was now acquainted, and that will shew there
was nothing of accident which had befallen me, but that all was the
effect of a long, regular, premeditated design.

“You may remember, madam, I told you that we were recommended to Mrs.
Ellison by the woman at whose house we had before lodged. This woman, it
seems, was one of my lord’s pimps, and had before introduced me to his
lordship’s notice.

“You are to know then, madam, that this villain, this lord, now confest
to me that he had first seen me in the gallery at the oratorio, whither
I had gone with tickets with which the woman where I first lodged had
presented me, and which were, it seems, purchased by my lord. Here I
first met the vile betrayer, who was disguised in a rug coat and a patch
upon his face.”

At these words Amelia cried, “O, gracious heavens!” and fell back in her
chair. Mrs. Bennet, with proper applications, brought her back to life;
and then Amelia acquainted her that she herself had first seen the same
person in the same place, and in the same disguise. “O, Mrs. Bennet!”
 cried she, “how am I indebted to you! what words, what thanks, what
actions can demonstrate the gratitude of my sentiments! I look upon
you, and always shall look upon you, as my preserver from the brink of a
precipice, from which I was falling into the same ruin which you have so
generously, so kindly, and so nobly disclosed for my sake.”

Here the two ladies compared notes; and it appeared that his lordship’s
behaviour at the oratorio had been alike to both; that he had made use
of the very same words, the very same actions to Amelia, which he had
practised over before on poor unfortunate Mrs. Bennet. It may, perhaps,
be thought strange that neither of them could afterwards recollect him;
but so it was. And, indeed, if we consider the force of disguise,
the very short time that either of them was with him at this first
interview, and the very little curiosity that must have been supposed in
the minds of the ladies, together with the amusement in which they were
then engaged, all wonder will, I apprehend, cease. Amelia, however, now
declared she remembered his voice and features perfectly well, and was
thoroughly satisfied he was the same person. She then accounted for his
not having visited in the afternoon, according to his promise, from her
declared resolutions to Mrs. Ellison not to see him. She now burst forth
into some very satirical invectives against that lady, and declared she
had the art, as well as the wickedness, of the devil himself.

Many congratulations now past from Mrs. Bennet to Amelia, which were
returned with the most hearty acknowledgments from that lady. But,
instead of filling our paper with these, we shall pursue Mrs. Bennet’s
story, which she resumed as we shall find in the next chapter.



