
_Being the last chapter of the seventh book._


Amelia did not fail to make proper compliments to Mrs. Bennet on the
conclusion of her speech in the last chapter. She told her that, from
the first moment of her acquaintance, she had the strongest inclination
to her friendship, and that her desires of that kind were much increased
by hearing her story. “Indeed, madam,” says she, “you are much too
severe a judge on yourself; for they must have very little candour, in
my opinion, who look upon your case with any severe eye. To me, I assure
you, you appear highly the object of compassion; and I shall always
esteem you as an innocent and an unfortunate woman.”

Amelia would then have taken her leave, but Mrs. Bennet so strongly
pressed her to stay to breakfast, that at length she complied; indeed,
she had fasted so long, and her gentle spirits had been so agitated with
variety of passions, that nature very strongly seconded Mrs. Bennet’s
motion.

Whilst the maid was preparing the tea-equipage, Amelia, with a little
slyness in her countenance, asked Mrs. Bennet if serjeant Atkinson did
not lodge in the same house with her? The other reddened so extremely
at the question, repeated the serjeant’s name with such hesitation, and
behaved so aukwardly, that Amelia wanted no further confirmation of her
suspicions. She would not, however, declare them abruptly to the other,
but began a dissertation on the serjeant’s virtues; and, after observing
the great concern which he had manifested when Mrs. Bennet was in her
fit, concluded with saying she believed the serjeant would make the best
husband in the world, for that he had great tenderness of heart and
a gentleness of manners not often to be found in any man, and much
seldomer in persons of his rank.

“And why not in his rank?” said Mrs. Bennet. “Indeed, Mrs. Booth, we
rob the lower order of mankind of their due. I do not deny the force and
power of education; but, when we consider how very injudicious is the
education of the better sort in general, how little they are instructed
in the practice of virtue, we shall not expect to find the heart
much improved by it. And even as to the head, how very slightly do we
commonly find it improved by what is called a genteel education! I
have myself, I think, seen instances of as great goodness, and as great
understanding too, among the lower sort of people as among the higher.
Let us compare your serjeant, now, with the lord who hath been the
subject of conversation; on which side would an impartial judge decide
the balance to incline?”

“How monstrous then,” cries Amelia, “is the opinion of those who
consider our matching ourselves the least below us in degree as a kind
of contamination!”

“A most absurd and preposterous sentiment,” answered Mrs. Bennet warmly;
“how abhorrent from justice, from common sense, and from humanity--but
how extremely incongruous with a religion which professes to know no
difference of degree, but ranks all mankind on the footing of brethren!
Of all kinds of pride, there is none so unchristian as that of station;
in reality, there is none so contemptible. Contempt, indeed, may be
said to be its own object; for my own part, I know none so despicable as
those who despise others.”

“I do assure you,” said Amelia, “you speak my own sentiments. I give you
my word, I should not be ashamed of being the wife of an honest man in
any station.--Nor if I had been much higher than I was, should I have
thought myself degraded by calling our honest serjeant my husband.”

“Since you have made this declaration,” cries Mrs. Bennet, “I am sure
you will not be offended at a secret I am going to mention to you.”

“Indeed, my dear,” answered Amelia, smiling, “I wonder rather you have
concealed it so long; especially after the many hints I have given you.”

“Nay, pardon me, madam,” replied the other; “I do not remember any such
hints; and, perhaps, you do not even guess what I am going to say.
My secret is this; that no woman ever had so sincere, so passionate a
lover, as you have had in the serjeant.”

“I a lover in the serjeant!--I!” cries Amelia, a little surprized.

“Have patience,” answered the other;--“I say, you, my dear. As much
surprized as you appear, I tell you no more than the truth; and yet it
is a truth you could hardly expect to hear from me, especially with so
much good-humour; since I will honestly confess to you.--But what need
have I to confess what I know you guess already?--Tell me now sincerely,
don’t you guess?”

“I guess, indeed, and hope,” said she, “that he is your husband.”

“He is, indeed, my husband,” cries the other; “and I am most happy in
your approbation. In honest truth, you ought to approve my choice; since
you was every way the occasion of my making it. What you said of him
very greatly recommended him to my opinion; but he endeared himself to
me most by what he said of you. In short, I have discovered that he hath
always loved you with such a faithful, honest, noble, generous passion,
that I was consequently convinced his mind must possess all the
ingredients of such a passion; and what are these but true honour,
goodness, modesty, bravery, tenderness, and, in a word, every human
virtue?--Forgive me, my dear; but I was uneasy till I became myself the
object of such a passion.”

“And do you really think,” said Amelia, smiling, “that I shall forgive
you robbing me of such a lover? or, supposing what you banter me with
was true, do you really imagine you could change such a passion?”

“No, my dear,” answered the other; “I only hope I have changed the
object; for be assured, there is no greater vulgar error than that it
is impossible for a man who loves one woman ever to love another. On the
contrary, it is certain that a man who can love one woman so well at a
distance will love another better that is nearer to him. Indeed, I have
heard one of the best husbands in the world declare, in the presence
of his wife, that he had always loved a princess with adoration. These
passions, which reside only in very amorous and very delicate minds,
feed only on the delicacies there growing; and leave all the substantial
food, and enough of the delicacy too, for the wife.”

The tea being now ready, Mrs. Bennet, or, if you please, for the future,
Mrs. Atkinson, proposed to call in her husband; but Amelia objected. She
said she should be glad to see him any other time, but was then in
the utmost hurry, as she had been three hours absent from all she most
loved. However, she had scarce drank a dish of tea before she changed
her mind; and, saying she would not part man and wife, desired Mr.
Atkinson might appear.

The maid answered that her master was not at home; which words she had
scarce spoken, when he knocked hastily at the door, and immediately came
running into the room, all pale and breathless, and, addressing himself
to Amelia, cried out, “I am sorry, my dear lady, to bring you ill news;
but Captain Booth”--“What! what!” cries Amelia, dropping the tea-cup
from her hand, “is anything the matter with him?”--“Don’t be frightened,
my dear lady,” said the serjeant: “he is in very good health; but a
misfortune hath happened.”--“Are my children well?” said Amelia.--“O,
very well,” answered the serjeant. “Pray, madam, don’t be frightened; I
hope it will signify nothing--he is arrested, but I hope to get him out
of their damned hands immediately.” “Where is he?” cries Amelia; “I will
go to him this instant!” “He begs you will not,” answered the serjeant.
“I have sent his lawyer to him, and am going back with Mrs. Ellison this
moment; but I beg your ladyship, for his sake, and for your own sake,
not to go.” “Mrs. Ellison! what is Mrs. Ellison to do?” cries Amelia:
“I must and will go.” Mrs. Atkinson then interposed, and begged that
she would not hurry her spirits, but compose herself, and go home to
her children, whither she would attend her. She comforted her with the
thoughts that the captain was in no immediate danger; that she could go
to him when she would; and desired her to let the serjeant return with
Mrs. Ellison, saying she might be of service, and that there was much
wisdom, and no kind of shame, in making use of bad people on certain
occasions.

“And who,” cries Amelia, a little come to herself, “hath done this
barbarous action?”

“One I am ashamed to name,” cries the serjeant; “indeed I had always a
very different opinion of him: I could not have believed anything but my
own ears and eyes; but Dr Harrison is the man who hath done the deed.”

“Dr Harrison!” cries Amelia. “Well, then, there is an end of all
goodness in the world. I will never have a good opinion of any human
being more.”

The serjeant begged that he might not be detained from the captain; and
that, if Amelia pleased to go home, he would wait upon her. But she
did not chuse to see Mrs. Ellison at this time; and, after a little
consideration, she resolved to stay where she was; and Mrs. Atkinson
agreed to go and fetch her children to her, it being not many doors
distant.

The serjeant then departed; Amelia, in her confusion, never having once
thought of wishing him joy on his marriage.




BOOK VIII.


