
_Being the first chapter of the eighth book._


The history must now look a little backwards to those circumstances
which led to the catastrophe mentioned at the end of the last book.

When Amelia went out in the morning she left her children to the care
of her husband. In this amiable office he had been engaged near an
hour, and was at that very time lying along on the floor, and his little
things crawling and playing about him, when a most violent knock
was heard at the door; and immediately a footman, running upstairs,
acquainted him that his lady was taken violently ill, and carried into
Mrs. Chenevix’s toy-shop.

Booth no sooner heard this account, which was delivered with great
appearance of haste and earnestness, than he leapt suddenly from the
floor, and, leaving his children, roaring at the news of their mother’s
illness, in strict charge with his maid, he ran as fast as his legs
could carry him to the place; or towards the place rather: for, before
he arrived at the shop, a gentleman stopt him full butt, crying,
“Captain, whither so fast?”--Booth answered eagerly, “Whoever you are,
friend, don’t ask me any questions now.”--“You must pardon me, captain,”
 answered the gentleman; “but I have a little business with your
honour--In short, captain, I have a small warrant here in my pocket
against your honour, at the suit of one Dr Harrison.” “You are a bailiff
then?” says Booth. “I am an officer, sir,” answered the other. “Well,
sir, it is in vain to contend,” cries Booth; “but let me beg you will
permit me only to step to Mrs. Chenevix’s--I will attend you, upon my
honour, wherever you please; but my wife lies violently ill there.” “Oh,
for that matter,” answered the bailiff, “you may set your heart at ease.
Your lady, I hope, is very well; I assure you she is not there. You will
excuse me, captain, these are only stratagems of war. _Bolus and virtus,
quis in a hostess equirit?_” “Sir, I honour your learning,” cries Booth,
“and could almost kiss you for what you tell me. I assure you I would
forgive you five hundred arrests for such a piece of news. Well, sir,
and whither am I to go with you?” “O, anywhere: where your honour
pleases,” cries the bailiff. “Then suppose we go to Brown’s
coffee-house,” said the prisoner. “No,” answered the bailiff, “that will
not do; that’s in the verge of the court.” “Why then, to the nearest
tavern,” said Booth. “No, not to a tavern,” cries the other, “that is
not a place of security; and you know, captain, your honour is a shy
cock; I have been after your honour these three months. Come, sir,
you must go to my house, if you please.” “With all my heart,” answered
Booth, “if it be anywhere hereabouts.” “Oh, it is but a little ways
off,” replied the bailiff; “it is only in Gray’s-inn-lane, just by
almost.” He then called a coach, and desired his prisoner to walk in.

Booth entered the coach without any resistance, which, had he been
inclined to make, he must have plainly perceived would have been
ineffectual, as the bailiff appeared to have several followers at hand,
two of whom, beside the commander in chief, mounted with him into the
coach. As Booth was a sweet-tempered man, as well as somewhat of a
philosopher, he behaved with all the good-humour imaginable, and indeed,
with more than his companions; who, however, shewed him what they call
civility, that is, they neither struck him nor spit in his face.

Notwithstanding the pleasantry which Booth endeavoured to preserve, he
in reality envied every labourer whom he saw pass by him in his way. The
charms of liberty, against his will, rushed on his mind; and he could
not avoid suggesting to himself how much more happy was the poorest
wretch who, without controul, could repair to his homely habitation
and to his family, compared to him, who was thus violently, and yet
lawfully, torn away from the company of his wife and children. And their
condition, especially that of his Amelia, gave his heart many a severe
and bitter pang.

At length he arrived at the bailiff’s mansion, and was ushered into
a room in which were several persons. Booth desired to be alone; upon
which the bailiff waited on him up-stairs into an apartment, the windows
of which were well fortified with iron bars, but the walls had not the
least outwork raised before them; they were, indeed, what is generally
called naked; the bricks having been only covered with a thin plaster,
which in many places was mouldered away.

The first demand made upon Booth was for coach-hire, which amounted
to two shillings, according to the bailiff’s account; that being just
double the legal fare. He was then asked if he did not chuse a bowl of
punch? to which he having answered in the negative, the bailiff replied,
“Nay, sir, just as you please. I don’t ask you to drink, if you don’t
chuse it; but certainly you know the custom; the house is full of
prisoners, and I can’t afford gentlemen a room to themselves for
nothing.”

Booth presently took this hint--indeed it was a pretty broad one--and
told the bailiff he should not scruple to pay him his price; but in
fact he never drank unless at his meals. “As to that, sir,” cries the
bailiff, “it is just as your honour pleases. I scorn to impose upon any
gentleman in misfortunes: I wish you well out of them, for my part.
Your honour can take nothing amiss of me; I only does my duty, what I
am bound to do; and, as you says you don’t care to drink anything, what
will you be pleased to have for dinner?”

Booth then complied in bespeaking a dish of meat, and told the bailiff
he would drink a bottle with him after dinner. He then desired
the favour of pen, ink, and paper, and a messenger; all which were
immediately procured him, the bailiff telling him he might send wherever
he pleased, and repeating his concern for Booth’s misfortunes, and a
hearty desire to see the end of them.

The messenger was just dispatched with the letter, when who should
arrive but honest Atkinson? A soldier of the guards, belonging to the
same company with the serjeant, and who had known Booth at Gibraltar,
had seen the arrest, and heard the orders given to the coachman. This
fellow, accidentally meeting Atkinson, had acquainted him with the whole
affair.

At the appearance of Atkinson, joy immediately overspread the
countenance of Booth. The ceremonials which past between them are
unnecessary to be repeated. Atkinson was soon dispatched to the attorney
and to Mrs. Ellison, as the reader hath before heard from his own mouth.

Booth now greatly lamented that he had writ to his wife. He thought she
might have been acquainted with the affair better by the serjeant. Booth
begged him, however, to do everything in his power to comfort her; to
assure her that he was in perfect health and good spirits; and to lessen
as much as possible the concern which he knew she would have at the
reading his letter.

The serjeant, however, as the reader hath seen, brought himself the
first account of the arrest. Indeed, the other messenger did not arrive
till a full hour afterwards. This was not owing to any slowness of his,
but to many previous errands which he was to execute before the delivery
of the letter; for, notwithstanding the earnest desire which the bailiff
had declared to see Booth out of his troubles, he had ordered the
porter, who was his follower, to call upon two or three other bailiffs,
and as many attorneys, to try to load his prisoner with as many actions
as possible.

Here the reader may be apt to conclude that the bailiff, instead of
being a friend, was really an enemy to poor Booth; but, in fact, he was
not so. His desire was no more than to accumulate bail-bonds; for the
bailiff was reckoned an honest and good sort of man in his way, and had
no more malice against the bodies in his custody than a butcher hath to
those in his: and as the latter, when he takes his knife in hand, hath
no idea but of the joints into which he is to cut the carcase; so the
former, when he handles his writ, hath no other design but to cut out
the body into as many bail-bonds as possible. As to the life of the
animal, or the liberty of the man, they are thoughts which never obtrude
themselves on either.



