
_Containing an account of Mr. Booth’s fellow-sufferers._


Before we return to Amelia we must detain our reader a little longer
with Mr. Booth, in the custody of Mr. Bondum the bailiff, who now
informed his prisoner that he was welcome to the liberty of the house
with the other gentlemen.

Booth asked who those gentlemen were. “One of them, sir,” says Mr.
Bondum, “is a very great writer or author, as they call him; he hath
been here these five weeks at the suit of a bookseller for eleven pound
odd money; but he expects to be discharged in a day or two, for he hath
writ out the debt. He is now writing for five or six booksellers, and
he will get you sometimes, when he sits to it, a matter of fifteen
shillings a-day. For he is a very good pen, they say, but is apt to be
idle. Some days he won’t write above five hours; but at other times I
have know him at it above sixteen.” “Ay!” cries Booth; “pray, what are
his productions? What does he write?” “Why, sometimes,” answered Bondum,
“he writes your history books for your numbers, and sometimes your
verses, your poems, what do you call them? and then again he writes
news for your newspapers.” “Ay, indeed! he is a most extraordinary man,
truly!--How doth he get his news here?” “Why he makes it, as he doth
your parliament speeches for your magazines. He reads them to us
sometimes over a bowl of punch. To be sure it is all one as if one was
in the parliament-house--it is about liberty and freedom, and about the
constitution of England. I say nothing for my part, for I will keep my
neck out of a halter; but, faith, he makes it out plainly to me that all
matters are not as they should be. I am all for liberty, for my part.”
 “Is that so consistent with your calling?” cries Booth. “I thought,
my friend, you had lived by depriving men of their liberty.” “That’s
another matter,” cries the bailiff; “that’s all according to law, and in
the way of business. To be sure, men must be obliged to pay their debts,
or else there would be an end of everything.” Booth desired the bailiff
to give him his opinion on liberty. Upon which, he hesitated a moment,
and then cried out, “O ‘tis a fine thing, ‘tis a very fine thing,
and the constitution of England.” Booth told him, that by the old
constitution of England he had heard that men could not be arrested for
debt; to which the bailiff answered, that must have been in very bad
times; “because as why,” says he, “would it not be the hardest thing in
the world if a man could not arrest another for a just and lawful debt?
besides, sir, you must be mistaken; for how could that ever be? is not
liberty the constitution of England? well, and is not the constitution,
as a man may say--whereby the constitution, that is the law and liberty,
and all that--”

Booth had a little mercy upon the poor bailiff, when he found him
rounding in this manner, and told him he had made the matter very clear.
Booth then proceeded to enquire after the other gentlemen, his fellows
in affliction; upon which Bondum acquainted him that one of the
prisoners was a poor fellow. “He calls himself a gentleman,” said
Bondum; “but I am sure I never saw anything genteel by him. In a week
that he hath been in my house he hath drank only part of one bottle of
wine. I intend to carry him to Newgate within a day or two, if he can’t
find bail, which, I suppose, he will not be able to do; for everybody
says he is an undone man. He hath run out all he hath by losses in
business, and one way or other; and he hath a wife and seven children.
Here was the whole family here the other day, all howling together. I
never saw such a beggarly crew; I was almost ashamed to see them in my
house. I thought they seemed fitter for Bridewell than any other place.
To be sure, I do not reckon him as proper company for such as you, sir;
but there is another prisoner in the house that I dare say you will like
very much. He is, indeed, very much of a gentleman, and spends his money
like one. I have had him only three days, and I am afraid he won’t stay
much longer. They say, indeed, he is a gamester; but what is that to me
or any one, as long as a man appears as a gentleman? I always love to
speak by people as I find; and, in my opinion, he is fit company for
the greatest lord in the land; for he hath very good cloaths, and money
enough. He is not here for debt, but upon a judge’s warrant for an
assault and battery; for the tipstaff locks up here.”

The bailiff was thus haranguing when he was interrupted by the
arrival of the attorney whom the trusty serjeant had, with the utmost
expedition, found out and dispatched to the relief of his distressed
friend. But before we proceed any further with the captain we will
return to poor Amelia, for whom, considering the situation in which we
left her, the good-natured reader may be, perhaps, in no small degree
solicitous.

[Illustration: no caption]



