
_Containing, among many matters, the exemplary behaviour of Colonel
James._


When Mrs. Ellison was departed, Mrs. Atkinson began to apply all her art
to soothe and comfort Amelia, but was presently prevented by her. “I am
ashamed, dear madam,” said Amelia, “of having indulged my affliction so
much at your expense. The suddenness of the occasion is my only excuse;
for, had I had time to summon my resolution to my assistance, I hope
I am mistress of more patience than you have hitherto seen me exert. I
know, madam, in my unwarrantable excesses, I have been guilty of many
transgressions. First, against that Divine will and pleasure without
whose permission, at least, no human accident can happen; in the
next place, madam, if anything can aggravate such a fault, I have
transgressed the laws of friendship as well as decency, in throwing upon
you some part of the load of my grief; and again, I have sinned against
common sense, which should teach me, instead of weakly and heavily
lamenting my misfortunes, to rouse all my spirits to remove them. In
this light I am shocked at my own folly, and am resolved to leave my
children under your care, and go directly to my husband. I may comfort
him. I may assist him. I may relieve him. There is nothing now too
difficult for me to undertake.”

Mrs. Atkinson greatly approved and complimented her friend on all the
former part of her speech, except what related to herself, on which
she spoke very civilly, and I believe with great truth; but as to her
determination of going to her husband she endeavoured to dissuade
her, at least she begged her to defer it for the present, and till the
serjeant returned home. She then reminded Amelia that it was now past
five in the afternoon, and that she had not taken any refreshment but
a dish of tea the whole day, and desired she would give her leave to
procure her a chick, or anything she liked better, for her dinner.

Amelia thanked her friend, and said she would sit down with her to
whatever she pleased; “but if I do not eat,” said she, “I would not have
you impute it to anything but want of appetite; for I assure you all
things are equally indifferent to me. I am more solicitous about these
poor little things, who have not been used to fast so long. Heaven knows
what may hereafter be their fate!”

Mrs. Atkinson bid her hope the best, and then recommended the children
to the care of her maid.

And now arrived a servant from Mrs. James, with an invitation to Captain
Booth and to his lady to dine with the colonel the day after the next.
This a little perplexed Amelia; but after a short consideration she
despatched an answer to Mrs. James, in which she concisely informed her
of what had happened.

The honest serjeant, who had been on his legs almost the whole day, now
returned, and brought Amelia a short letter from her husband, in which
he gave her the most solemn assurances of his health and spirits, and
begged her with great earnestness to take care to preserve her own,
which if she did, he said, he had no doubt but that they should shortly
be happy. He added something of hopes from my lord, with which Mrs.
Ellison had amused him, and which served only to destroy the comfort
that Amelia received from the rest of his letter.

Whilst Amelia, the serjeant, and his lady, were engaged in a cold
collation, for which purpose a cold chicken was procured from the tavern
for the ladies, and two pound of cold beef for the serjeant, a violent
knocking was heard at the door, and presently afterwards Colonel James
entered the room. After proper compliments had past, the colonel told
Amelia that her letter was brought to Mrs. James while they were at
table, and that on her shewing it him he had immediately rose up, made
an apology to his company, and took a chair to her. He spoke to her with
great tenderness on the occasion, and desired her to make herself easy;
assuring her that he would leave nothing in his power undone to serve
her husband. He then gave her an invitation, in his wife’s name, to his
own house, in the most pressing manner.

Amelia returned him very hearty thanks for all his kind offers, but
begged to decline that of an apartment in his house. She said, as she
could not leave her children, so neither could she think of bringing
such a trouble with her into his family; and, though the colonel gave
her many assurances that her children, as well as herself, would be very
welcome to Mrs. James, and even betook himself to entreaties, she still
persisted obstinately in her refusal.

In real truth, Amelia had taken a vast affection for Mrs. Atkinson, of
the comfort of whose company she could not bear to be deprived in her
distress, nor to exchange it for that of Mrs. James, to whom she had
lately conceived no little dislike.

The colonel, when he found he could not prevail with Amelia to accept
his invitation, desisted from any farther solicitations. He then took
a bank-bill of fifty pounds from his pocket-book, and said, “You will
pardon me, dear madam, if I chuse to impute your refusal of my house
rather to a dislike of my wife, who I will not pretend to be the most
agreeable of women (all men,” said he, sighing, “have not Captain
Booth’s fortune), than to any aversion or anger to me. I must insist
upon it, therefore, to make your present habitation as easy to you as
possible--I hope, madam, you will not deny me this happiness; I beg you
will honour me with the acceptance of this trifle.” He then put the note
into her hand, and declared that the honour of touching it was worth a
hundred times that sum.

“I protest, Colonel James,” cried Amelia, blushing, “I know not what to
do or say, your goodness so greatly confounds me. Can I, who am so well
acquainted with the many great obligations Mr. Booth already hath to
your generosity, consent that you should add more to a debt we never can
pay?”

The colonel stopt her short, protesting that she misplaced the
obligation; for, that if to confer the highest happiness was to oblige,
he was obliged to her acceptance. “And I do assure you, madam,” said he,
“if this trifling sum or a much larger can contribute to your ease, I
shall consider myself as the happiest man upon earth in being able to
supply it, and you, madam, my greatest benefactor in receiving it.”

Amelia then put the note in her pocket, and they entered into a
conversation in which many civil things were said on both sides; but
what was chiefly worth remark was, that Amelia had almost her husband
constantly in her mouth, and the colonel never mentioned him: the former
seemed desirous to lay all obligations, as much as possible, to the
account of her husband; and the latter endeavoured, with the utmost
delicacy, to insinuate that her happiness was the main and indeed only
point which he had in view.

Amelia had made no doubt, at the colonel’s first appearance, but that he
intended to go directly to her husband. When he dropt therefore a hint
of his intention to visit him next morning she appeared visibly shocked
at the delay. The colonel, perceiving this, said, “However inconvenient
it may be, yet, madam, if it will oblige you, or if you desire it, I
will even go to-night.” Amelia answered, “My husband will be far from
desiring to derive any good from your inconvenience; but, if you put it
to me, I must be excused for saying I desire nothing more in the world
than to send him so great a comfort as I know he will receive from
the presence of such a friend.” “Then, to show you, madam,” cries the
colonel, “that I desire nothing more in the world than to give you
pleasure, I will go to him immediately.”

Amelia then bethought herself of the serjeant, and told the colonel his
old acquaintance Atkinson, whom he had known at Gibraltar, was then
in the house, and would conduct him to the place. The serjeant was
immediately called in, paid his respects to the colonel, and was
acknowledged by him. They both immediately set forward, Amelia to the
utmost of her power pressing their departure.

Mrs. Atkinson now returned to Amelia, and was by her acquainted with the
colonel’s late generosity; for her heart so boiled over with gratitude
that she could not conceal the ebullition. Amelia likewise gave her
friend a full narrative of the colonel’s former behaviour and friendship
to her husband, as well abroad as in England; and ended with declaring
that she believed him to be the most generous man upon earth.

Mrs. Atkinson agreed with Amelia’s conclusion, and said she was glad to
hear there was any such man. They then proceeded with the children to
the tea-table, where panegyric, and not scandal, was the topic of their
conversation; and of this panegyric the colonel was the subject; both
the ladies seeming to vie with each other in celebrating the praises of
his goodness.



