
_Worthy a very serious perusal._


The colonel found Amelia sitting very disconsolate with Mrs. Atkinson.
He entered the room with an air of great gaiety, assured Amelia that
her husband was perfectly well, and that he hoped the next day he would
again be with her.

Amelia was a little comforted at this account, and vented many grateful
expressions to the colonel for his unparalleled friendship, as she was
pleased to call it. She could not, however, help giving way soon after
to a sigh at the thoughts of her husband’s bondage, and declared that
night would be the longest she had ever known.

“This lady, madam,” cries the colonel, “must endeavour to make it
shorter. And, if you will give me leave, I will join in the same
endeavour.” Then, after some more consolatory speeches, the colonel
attempted to give a gay turn to the discourse, and said, “I was engaged
to have spent this evening disagreeably at Ranelagh, with a set of
company I did not like. How vastly am I obliged to you, dear Mrs. Booth,
that I pass it so infinitely more to my satisfaction!”

“Indeed, colonel,” said Amelia, “I am convinced that to a mind so
rightly turned as yours there must be a much sweeter relish in the
highest offices of friendship than in any pleasures which the gayest
public places can afford.”

“Upon my word, madam,” said the colonel, “you now do me more than
justice. I have, and always had, the utmost indifference for such
pleasures. Indeed, I hardly allow them worthy of that name, or, if they
are so at all, it is in a very low degree. In my opinion the highest
friendship must always lead us to the highest pleasure.”

Here Amelia entered into a long dissertation on friendship, in which she
pointed several times directly at the colonel as the hero of her tale.

The colonel highly applauded all her sentiments; and when he could
not avoid taking the compliment to himself, he received it with a most
respectful bow. He then tried his hand likewise at description, in which
he found means to repay all Amelia’s panegyric in kind. This, though he
did with all possible delicacy, yet a curious observer might have been
apt to suspect that it was chiefly on her account that the colonel had
avoided the masquerade.

In discourses of this kind they passed the evening, till it was very
late, the colonel never offering to stir from his chair before the clock
had struck one; when he thought, perhaps, that decency obliged him to
take his leave.

As soon as he was gone Mrs. Atkinson said to Mrs. Booth, “I think,
madam, you told me this afternoon that the colonel was married?”

Amelia answered, she did so.

“I think likewise, madam,” said Mrs. Atkinson, “you was acquainted with
the colonel’s lady?”

Amelia answered that she had been extremely intimate with her abroad.

“Is she young and handsome?” said Mrs. Atkinson. “In short, pray, was it
a match of love or convenience?”

Amelia answered, entirely of love, she believed, on his side; for that
the lady had little or no fortune.

“I am very glad to hear it,” said Mrs. Atkinson; “for I am sure the
colonel is in love with somebody. I think I never saw a more luscious
picture of love drawn than that which he was pleased to give us as the
portraiture of friendship. I have read, indeed, of Pylades and Orestes,
Damon and Pythias, and other great friends of old; nay, I sometimes
flatter myself that I am capable of being a friend myself; but as for
that fine, soft, tender, delicate passion, which he was pleased
to describe, I am convinced there must go a he and a she to the
composition.”

“Upon my word, my dear, you are mistaken,” cries Amelia. “If you had
known the friendship which hath always subsisted between the colonel
and my husband, you would not imagine it possible for any description
to exceed it. Nay, I think his behaviour this very day is sufficient to
convince you.”

“I own what he hath done to-day hath great merit,” said Mrs. Atkinson;
“and yet, from what he hath said to-night--You will pardon me, dear
madam; perhaps I am too quick-sighted in my observations; nay, I am
afraid I am even impertinent.”

“Fie upon it!” cries Amelia; “how can you talk in that strain? Do you
imagine I expect ceremony? Pray speak what you think with the utmost
freedom.”

“Did he not then,” said Mrs. Atkinson, “repeat the words, _the
finest woman in the world_, more than once? did he not make use of an
expression which might have become the mouth of Oroondates himself? If
I remember, the words were these--that, had he been Alexander the Great,
he should have thought it more glory to have wiped off a tear from the
bright eyes of Statira than to have conquered fifty worlds.”

“Did he say so?” cries Amelia--“I think he did say something like it;
but my thoughts were so full of my husband that I took little notice.
But what would you infer from what he said? I hope you don’t think he is
in love with me?”

“I hope he doth not think so himself,” answered Mrs. Atkinson; “though,
when he mentioned the bright eyes of Statira, he fixed his own eyes on
yours with the most languishing air I ever beheld.”

Amelia was going to answer, when the serjeant arrived, and then she
immediately fell to enquiring after her husband, and received such
satisfactory answers to all her many questions concerning him, that
she expressed great pleasure. These ideas so possessed her mind, that,
without once casting her thoughts on any other matters, she took her
leave of the serjeant and his lady, and repaired to bed to her children,
in a room which Mrs. Atkinson had provided her in the same house; where
we will at present wish her a good night.



