
_In which the history looks backwards._


Before we proceed farther with our history it may be proper to look back
a little, in order to account for the late conduct of Doctor Harrison;
which, however inconsistent it may have hitherto appeared, when examined
to the bottom will be found, I apprehend, to be truly congruous with
all the rules of the most perfect prudence as well as with the most
consummate goodness.

We have already partly seen in what light Booth had been represented to
the doctor abroad. Indeed, the accounts which were sent of the captain,
as well by the curate as by a gentleman of the neighbourhood, were much
grosser and more to his disadvantage than the doctor was pleased to set
them forth in his letter to the person accused. What sense he had of
Booth’s conduct was, however, manifest by that letter. Nevertheless, he
resolved to suspend his final judgment till his return; and, though
he censured him, would not absolutely condemn him without ocular
demonstration.

The doctor, on his return to his parish, found all the accusations which
had been transmitted to him confirmed by many witnesses, of which the
curate’s wife, who had been formerly a friend to Amelia, and still
preserved the outward appearance of friendship, was the strongest. She
introduced all with--“I am sorry to say it; and it is friendship which
bids me speak; and it is for their good it should be told you.” After
which beginnings she never concluded a single speech without some horrid
slander and bitter invective.

Besides the malicious turn which was given to these affairs in the
country, which were owing a good deal to misfortune, and some little
perhaps to imprudence, the whole neighbourhood rung with several gross
and scandalous lies, which were merely the inventions of his enemies,
and of which the scene was laid in London since his absence.

Poisoned with all this malice, the doctor came to town; and, learning
where Booth lodged, went to make him a visit. Indeed, it was the doctor,
and no other, who had been at his lodgings that evening when Booth and
Amelia were walking in the Park, and concerning which the reader may be
pleased to remember so many strange and odd conjectures.

Here the doctor saw the little gold watch and all those fine trinkets
with which the noble lord had presented the children, and which, from
the answers given him by the poor ignorant, innocent girl, he could have
no doubt had been purchased within a few days by Amelia.

This account tallied so well with the ideas he had imbibed of Booth’s
extravagance in the country, that he firmly believed both the husband
and wife to be the vainest, silliest, and most unjust people alive. It
was, indeed, almost incredible that two rational beings should be
guilty of such absurdity; but, monstrous and absurd as it was, ocular
demonstration appeared to be the evidence against them.

The doctor departed from their lodgings enraged at this supposed
discovery, and, unhappily for Booth, was engaged to supper that very
evening with the country gentleman of whom Booth had rented a farm.
As the poor captain happened to be the subject of conversation, and
occasioned their comparing notes, the account which the doctor gave of
what he had seen that evening so incensed the gentleman, to whom Booth
was likewise a debtor, that he vowed he would take a writ out against
him the next morning, and have his body alive or dead; and the
doctor was at last persuaded to do the same. Mr. Murphy was thereupon
immediately sent for; and the doctor in his presence repeated again what
he had seen at his lodgings as the foundation of his suing him, which
the attorney, as we have before seen, had blabbed to Atkinson.

But no sooner did the doctor hear that Booth was arrested than the
wretched condition of his wife and family began to affect his mind. The
children, who were to be utterly undone with their father, were intirely
innocent; and as for Amelia herself, though he thought he had most
convincing proofs of very blameable levity, yet his former friendship
and affection to her were busy to invent every excuse, till, by very
heavily loading the husband, they lightened the suspicion against the
wife.

In this temper of mind he resolved to pay Amelia a second visit, and was
on his way to Mrs. Ellison when the serjeant met him and made himself
known to him. The doctor took his old servant into a coffee-house, where
he received from him such an account of Booth and his family, that he
desired the serjeant to shew him presently to Amelia; and this was
the cordial which we mentioned at the end of the ninth chapter of the
preceding book.

The doctor became soon satisfied concerning the trinkets which had given
him so much uneasiness, and which had brought so much mischief on the
head of poor Booth. Amelia likewise gave the doctor some satisfaction
as to what he had heard of her husband’s behaviour in the country; and
assured him, upon her honour, that Booth could so well answer every
complaint against his conduct, that she had no doubt but that a man of
the doctor’s justice and candour would entirely acquit him, and would
consider him as an innocent unfortunate man, who was the object of a
good man’s compassion, not of his anger or resentment.

This worthy clergyman, who was not desirous of finding proofs to condemn
the captain or to justify his own vindictive proceedings, but, on the
contrary, rejoiced heartily in every piece of evidence which tended
to clear up the character of his friend, gave a ready ear to all which
Amelia said. To this, indeed, he was induced by the love he always had
for that lady, by the good opinion he entertained of her, as well as
by pity for her present condition, than which nothing appeared more
miserable; for he found her in the highest agonies of grief and despair,
with her two little children crying over their wretched mother. These
are, indeed, to a well-disposed mind, the most tragical sights that
human nature can furnish, and afford a juster motive to grief and tears
in the beholder than it would be to see all the heroes who have ever
infested the earth hanged all together in a string.

The doctor felt this sight as he ought. He immediately endeavoured to
comfort the afflicted; in which he so well succeeded, that he restored
to Amelia sufficient spirits to give him the satisfaction we have
mentioned: after which he declared he would go and release her husband,
which he accordingly did in the manner we have above related.



