
_A conversation between Dr Harrison and others_.


The next day Booth and his lady, with the doctor, met at Colonel
James’s, where Colonel Bath likewise made one of the company.

Nothing very remarkable passed at dinner, or till the ladies withdrew.
During this time, however, the behaviour of Colonel James was such as
gave some uneasiness to Amelia, who well understood his meaning, though
the particulars were too refined and subtle to be observed by any other
present.

When the ladies were gone, which was as soon as Amelia could prevail
on Mrs. James to depart, Colonel Bath, who had been pretty brisk with
champagne at dinner, soon began to display his magnanimity. “My brother
tells me, young gentleman,” said he to Booth, “that you have been used
very ill lately by some rascals, and I have no doubt but you will do
yourself justice.”

Booth answered that he did not know what he meant. “Since I must mention
it then,” cries the colonel, “I hear you have been arrested; and I think
you know what satisfaction is to be required by a man of honour.”

“I beg, sir,” says the doctor, “no more may be mentioned of that matter.
I am convinced no satisfaction will be required of the captain till he
is able to give it.”

“I do not understand what you mean by able,” cries the colonel. To which
the doctor answered, “That it was of too tender a nature to speak more
of.”

“Give me your hand, doctor,” cries the colonel; “I see you are a man of
honour, though you wear a gown. It is, as you say, a matter of a tender
nature. Nothing, indeed, is so tender as a man’s honour. Curse my liver,
if any man--I mean, that is, if any gentleman, was to arrest me, I would
as surely cut his throat as--”

“How, sir!” said the doctor, “would you compensate one breach of the law
by a much greater, and pay your debts by committing murder?”

“Why do you mention law between gentlemen?” says the colonel. “A man of
honour wears his law by his side; and can the resentment of an affront
make a gentleman guilty of murder? and what greater affront can one
man cast upon another than by arresting him? I am convinced that he who
would put up an arrest would put up a slap in the face.”

Here the colonel looked extremely fierce, and the divine stared
with astonishment at this doctrine; when Booth, who well knew the
impossibility of opposing the colonel’s humour with success, began to
play with it; and, having first conveyed a private wink to the doctor,
he said there might be cases undoubtedly where such an affront ought
to be resented; but that there were others where any resentment was
impracticable: “As, for instance,” said he, “where the man is arrested
by a woman.”

“I could not be supposed to mean that case,” cries the colonel; “and you
are convinced I did not mean it.”

“To put an end to this discourse at once, sir,” said the doctor, “I was
the plaintiff at whose suit this gentleman was arrested.”

“Was you so, sir?” cries the colonel; “then I have no more to say. Women
and the clergy are upon the same footing. The long-robed gentry are
exempted from the laws of honour.”

“I do not thank you for that exemption, sir,” cries the doctor; “and, if
honour and fighting are, as they seem to be, synonymous words with you,
I believe there are some clergymen, who in defence of their religion, or
their country, or their friend, the only justifiable causes of fighting,
except bare self-defence, would fight as bravely as yourself, colonel!
and that without being paid for it.”

“Sir, you are privileged,” says the colonel, with great dignity; “and
you have my leave to say what you please. I respect your order, and you
cannot offend me.”

“I will not offend you, colonel,” cries the doctor; “and our order is
very much obliged to you, since you profess so much respect to us, and
pay none to our Master.”

“What Master, sir?” said the colonel.

“That Master,” answered the doctor, “who hath expressly forbidden all
that cutting of throats to which you discover so much inclination.”

“O! your servant, sir,” said the colonel; “I see what you are driving
at; but you shall not persuade me to think that religion forces me to be
a coward.”

“I detest and despise the name as much as you can,” cries the doctor;
“but you have a wrong idea of the word, colonel. What were all the
Greeks and Romans? were these cowards? and yet, did you ever hear of
this butchery, which we call duelling, among them?”

“Yes, indeed, have I,” cries the colonel. “What else is all Mr. Pope’s
Homer full of but duels? Did not what’s his name, one of the Agamemnons,
fight with that paultry rascal Paris? and Diomede with what d’ye call
him there? and Hector with I forget his name, he that was Achilles’s
bosom-friend; and afterwards with Achilles himself? Nay, and in Dryden’s
Virgil, is there anything almost besides fighting?”

“You are a man of learning, colonel,” cries the doctor; “but--”

“I thank you for that compliment,” said the colonel.--“No, sir, I do
not pretend to learning; but I have some little reading, and I am not
ashamed to own it.”

“But are you sure, colonel,” cries the doctor, “that you have not made
a small mistake? for I am apt to believe both Mr. Pope and Mr. Dryden
(though I cannot say I ever read a word of either of them) speak of wars
between nations, and not of private duels; for of the latter I do not
remember one single instance in all the Greek and Roman story. In short,
it is a modern custom, introduced by barbarous nations since the times
of Christianity; though it is a direct and audacious defiance of the
Christian law, and is consequently much more sinful in us than it would
have been in the heathens.”

“Drink about, doctor,” cries the colonel; “and let us call a new cause;
for I perceive we shall never agree on this. You are a Churchman, and I
don’t expect you to speak your mind.”

“We are both of the same Church, I hope,” cries the doctor.

“I am of the Church of England, sir,” answered the colonel, “and will
fight for it to the last drop of my blood.”

“It is very generous in you, colonel,” cries the doctor, “to fight so
zealously for a religion by which you are to be damned.”

“It is well for you, doctor,” cries the colonel, “that you wear a gown;
for, by all the dignity of a man, if any other person had said the words
you have just uttered, I would have made him eat them; ay, d--n me, and
my sword into the bargain.”

Booth began to be apprehensive that this dispute might grow too warm;
in which case he feared that the colonel’s honour, together with the
champagne, might hurry him so far as to forget the respect due, and
which he professed to pay, to the sacerdotal robe. Booth therefore
interposed between the disputants, and said that the colonel had very
rightly proposed to call a new subject; for that it was impossible to
reconcile accepting a challenge with the Christian religion, or refusing
it with the modern notion of honour. “And you must allow it, doctor,”
 said he, “to be a very hard injunction for a man to become infamous;
and more especially for a soldier, who is to lose his bread into the
bargain.”

“Ay, sir,” says the colonel, with an air of triumph, “what say you to
that?”

“Why, I say,” cries the doctor, “that it is much harder to be damned on
the other side.”

“That may be,” said the colonel; “but damn me, if I would take an
affront of any man breathing, for all that. And yet I believe myself to
be as good a Christian as wears a head. My maxim is, never to give an
affront, nor ever to take one; and I say that it is the maxim of a good
Christian, and no man shall ever persuade me to the contrary.”

“Well, sir,” said the doctor, “since that is your resolution, I hope no
man will ever give you an affront.”

“I am obliged to you for your hope, doctor,” cries the colonel, with
a sneer; “and he that doth will be obliged to you for lending him
your gown; for, by the dignity of a man, nothing out of petticoats, I
believe, dares affront me.”

Colonel James had not hitherto joined in the discourse. In truth, his
thoughts had been otherwise employed; nor is it very difficult for the
reader to guess what had been the subject of them. Being waked, however,
from his reverie, and having heard the two or three last speeches, he
turned to his brother, and asked him, why he would introduce such a
topic of conversation before a gentleman of Doctor Harrison’s character?

“Brother,” cried Bath, “I own it was wrong, and I ask the doctor’s
pardon: I know not how it happened to arise; for you know, brother, I am
not used to talk of these matters. They are generally poltroons that do.
I think I need not be beholden to my tongue to declare I am none. I have
shown myself in a line of battle. I believe there is no man will deny
that; I believe I may say no man dares deny that I have done my duty.”

The colonel was thus proceeding to prove that his prowess was neither
the subject of his discourse nor the object of his vanity, when a
servant entered and summoned the company to tea with the ladies; a
summons which Colonel James instantly obeyed, and was followed by all
the rest.

But as the tea-table conversation, though extremely delightful to those
who are engaged in it, may probably appear somewhat dull to the reader,
we will here put an end to the chapter.



