
_A dialogue between Booth and Amelia_.


The next morning early, Booth went by appointment and waited on Colonel
James; whence he returned to Amelia in that kind of disposition which
the great master of human passion would describe in Andromache, when he
tells us she cried and smiled at the same instant.

Amelia plainly perceived the discomposure of his mind, in which
the opposite affections of joy and grief were struggling for the
superiority, and begged to know the occasion; upon which Booth spoke as
follows:--

“My dear,” said he, “I had no intention to conceal from you what hath
past this morning between me and the colonel, who hath oppressed me, if
I may use that expression, with obligations. Sure never man had such a
friend; for never was there so noble, so generous a heart--I cannot help
this ebullition of gratitude, I really cannot.” Here he paused a moment,
and wiped his eyes, and then proceeded: “You know, my dear, how gloomy
the prospect was yesterday before our eyes, how inevitable ruin stared
me in the face; and the dreadful idea of having entailed beggary on my
Amelia and her posterity racked my mind; for though, by the goodness of
the doctor, I had regained my liberty, the debt yet remained; and, if
that worthy man had a design of forgiving me his share, this must have
been my utmost hope, and the condition in which I must still have found
myself need not to be expatiated on. In what light, then, shall I see,
in what words shall I relate, the colonel’s kindness? O my dear Amelia!
he hath removed the whole gloom at once, hath driven all despair out
of my mind, and hath filled it with the most sanguine, and, at the same
time, the most reasonable hopes of making a comfortable provision for
yourself and my dear children. In the first place, then, he will advance
me a sum of money to pay off all my debts; and this on a bond to be
repaid only when I shall become colonel of a regiment, and not before.
In the next place, he is gone this very morning to ask a company for me,
which is now vacant in the West Indies; and, as he intends to push this
with all his interest, neither he nor I have any doubt of his success.
Now, my dear, comes the third, which, though perhaps it ought to give me
the greatest joy, such is, I own, the weakness of my nature, it rends my
very heartstrings asunder. I cannot mention it, for I know it will give
you equal pain; though I know, on all proper occasions, you can exert a
manly resolution. You will not, I am convinced, oppose it, whatever you
must suffer in complying. O my dear Amelia! I must suffer likewise;
yet I have resolved to bear it. You know not what my poor heart hath
suffered since he made the proposal. It is love for you alone which
could persuade me to submit to it. Consider our situation; consider that
of our children; reflect but on those poor babes, whose future happiness
is at stake, and it must arm your resolution. It is your interest and
theirs that reconciled me to a proposal which, when the colonel first
made it, struck me with the utmost horror; he hath, indeed, from these
motives, persuaded me into a resolution which I thought impossible for
any one to have persuaded me into. O my dear Amelia! let me entreat
you to give me up to the good of your children, as I have promised the
colonel to give you up to their interest and your own. If you refuse
these terms we are still undone, for he insists absolutely upon them.
Think, then, my love, however hard they may be, necessity compels us to
submit to them. I know in what light a woman, who loves like you, must
consider such a proposal; and yet how many instances have you of women
who, from the same motives, have submitted to the same!”

“What can you mean, Mr. Booth?” cries Amelia, trembling.

“Need I explain my meaning to you more?” answered Booth.--“Did I not say
I must give up my Amelia?”

“Give me up!” said she.

“For a time only, I mean,” answered he: “for a short time perhaps. The
colonel himself will take care it shall not be long--for I know his
heart; I shall scarce have more joy in receiving you back than he will
have in restoring you to my arms. In the mean time, he will not only be
a father to my children, but a husband to you.”

“A husband to me!” said Amelia.

“Yes, my dear; a kind, a fond, a tender, an affectionate husband. If
I had not the most certain assurances of this, doth my Amelia think I
could be prevailed on to leave her? No, my Amelia, he is the only man on
earth who could have prevailed on me; but I know his house, his purse,
his protection, will be all at your command. And as for any dislike
you have conceived to his wife, let not that be any objection; for I
am convinced he will not suffer her to insult you; besides, she is
extremely well bred, and, how much soever she may hate you in her heart,
she will at least treat you with civility.

“Nay, the invitation is not his, but hers; and I am convinced they will
both behave to you with the greatest friendship; his I am sure will
be sincere, as to the wife of a friend entrusted to his care; and hers
will, from good-breeding, have not only the appearances but the effects
of the truest friendship.”

“I understand you, my dear, at last,” said she (indeed she had rambled
into very strange conceits from some parts of his discourse); “and I
will give you my resolution in a word--I will do the duty of a wife, and
that is, to attend her husband wherever he goes.”

Booth attempted to reason with her, but all to no purpose. She gave,
indeed, a quiet hearing to all he said, and even to those parts which
most displeased her ears; I mean those in which he exaggerated the great
goodness and disinterested generosity of his friend; but her resolution
remained inflexible, and resisted the force of all his arguments with a
steadiness of opposition, which it would have been almost excusable in
him to have construed into stubbornness.

The doctor arrived in the midst of the dispute; and, having heard
the merits of the cause on both sides, delivered his opinion in the
following words.

“I have always thought it, my dear children, a matter of the utmost
nicety to interfere in any differences between husband and wife; but,
since you both desire me with such earnestness to give you my sentiments
on the present contest between you, I will give you my thoughts as well
as I am able. In the first place then, can anything be more reasonable
than for a wife to desire to attend her husband? It is, as my favourite
child observes, no more than a desire to do her duty; and I make no
doubt but that is one great reason of her insisting on it. And how can
you yourself oppose it? Can love be its own enemy? or can a husband who
is fond of his wife, content himself almost on any account with a long
absence from her?”

“You speak like an angel, my dear Doctor Harrison,” answered Amelia: “I
am sure, if he loved as tenderly as I do, he could on no account submit
to it.”

“Pardon me, child,” cries the doctor; “there are some reasons which
would not only justify his leaving you, but which must force him, if
he hath any real love for you, joined with common sense, to make that
election. If it was necessary, for instance, either to your good or to
the good of your children, he would not deserve the name of a man, I am
sure not that of a husband, if he hesitated a moment. Nay, in that
case, I am convinced you yourself would be an advocate for what you now
oppose. I fancy therefore I mistook him when I apprehended he said that
the colonel made his leaving you behind as the condition of getting him
the commission; for I know my dear child hath too much goodness, and too
much sense, and too much resolution, to prefer any temporary indulgence
of her own passions to the solid advantages of her whole family.”

“There, my dear!” cries Booth; “I knew what opinion the doctor would be
of. Nay, I am certain there is not a wise man in the kingdom who would
say otherwise.”

“Don’t abuse me, young gentleman,” said the doctor, “with appellations I
don’t deserve.”

“I abuse you, my dear doctor!” cries Booth.

“Yes, my dear sir,” answered the doctor; “you insinuated slily that
I was wise, which, as the world understands the phrase, I should be
ashamed of; and my comfort is that no one can accuse me justly of it. I
have just given an instance of the contrary by throwing away my advice.”

“I hope, sir,” cries Booth, “that will not be the case.”

“Yes, sir,” answered the doctor. “I know it will be the case in the
present instance, for either you will not go at all, or my little turtle
here will go with you.”

“You are in the right, doctor,” cries Amelia.

“I am sorry for it,” said the doctor, “for then I assure you you are in
the wrong.”

“Indeed,” cries Amelia, “if you knew all my reasons you would say they
were very strong ones.”

“Very probably,” cries the doctor. “The knowledge that they are in the
wrong is a very strong reason to some women to continue so.”

“Nay, doctor,” cries Amelia, “you shall never persuade me of that. I
will not believe that any human being ever did an action merely because
they knew it to be wrong.”

“I am obliged to you, my dear child,” said the doctor, “for declaring
your resolution of not being persuaded. Your husband would never call
me a wise man again if, after that declaration, I should attempt to
persuade you.”

“Well, I must be content,” cries Amelia, “to let you think as you
please.”

“That is very gracious, indeed,” said the doctor. “Surely, in a country
where the church suffers others to think as they please, it would be
very hard if they had not themselves the same liberty. And yet, as
unreasonable as the power of controuling men’s thoughts is represented,
I will shew you how you shall controul mine whenever you desire it.”

“How, pray?” cries Amelia. “I should greatly esteem that power.”

“Why, whenever you act like a wise woman,” cries the doctor, “you will
force me to think you so: and, whenever you are pleased to act as you do
now, I shall be obliged, whether I will or no, to think as I do now.”

“Nay, dear doctor,” cries Booth, “I am convinced my Amelia will never do
anything to forfeit your good opinion. Consider but the cruel hardship
of what she is to undergo, and you will make allowances for the
difficulty she makes in complying. To say the truth, when I examine my
own heart, I have more obligations to her than appear at first sight;
for, by obliging me to find arguments to persuade her, she hath assisted
me in conquering myself. Indeed, if she had shewn more resolution, I
should have shewn less.”

“So you think it necessary, then,” said the doctor, “that there should
be one fool at least in every married couple. A mighty resolution,
truly! and well worth your valuing yourself upon, to part with your wife
for a few months in order to make the fortune of her and your children;
when you are to leave her, too, in the care and protection of a friend
that gives credit to the old stories of friendship, and doth an honour
to human nature. What, in the name of goodness! do either of you think
that you have made an union to endure for ever? How will either of you
bear that separation which must, some time or other, and perhaps very
soon, be the lot of one of you? Have you forgot that you are both
mortal? As for Christianity, I see you have resigned all pretensions
to it; for I make no doubt but that you have so set your hearts on the
happiness you enjoy here together, that neither of you ever think a word
of hereafter.”

Amelia now burst into tears; upon which Booth begged the doctor to
proceed no farther. Indeed, he would not have wanted the caution; for,
however blunt he appeared in his discourse, he had a tenderness of heart
which is rarely found among men; for which I know no other reason than
that true goodness is rarely found among them; for I am firmly persuaded
that the latter never possessed any human mind in any degree, without
being attended by as large a portion of the former.

Thus ended the conversation on this subject; what followed is not worth
relating, till the doctor carried off Booth with him to take a walk in
the Park.



