
_In which the author appears to be master of that profound learning
called the knowledge of the town._


Mrs. James now came to pay a morning’s visit to Amelia. She entered
the room with her usual gaiety, and after a slight preface, addressing
herself to Booth, said she had been quarrelling with her husband on his
account. “I know not,” said she, “what he means by thinking of sending
you the Lord knows whither. I have insisted on his asking something for
you nearer home; and it would be the hardest thing in the world if he
should not obtain it. Are we resolved never to encourage merit; but to
throw away all our preferments on those who do not deserve them? What
a set of contemptible wretches do we see strutting about the town in
scarlet!”

Booth made a very low bow, and modestly spoke in disparagement of
himself. To which she answered, “Indeed, Mr. Booth, you have merit; I
have heard it from my brother, who is a judge of those matters, and I
am sure cannot be suspected of flattery. He is your friend as well as
myself, and we will never let Mr. James rest till he hath got you a
commission in England.”

Booth bowed again, and was offering to speak, but she interrupted him,
saying, “I will have no thanks, nor no fine speeches; if I can do you
any service I shall think I am only paying the debt of friendship to my
dear Mrs. Booth.”

Amelia, who had long since forgot the dislike she had taken to Mrs.
James at her first seeing her in town, had attributed it to the right
cause, and had begun to resume her former friendship for her, expressed
very warm sentiments of gratitude on this occasion. She told Mrs. James
she should be eternally obliged to her if she could succeed in her kind
endeavours; for that the thoughts of parting again with her husband had
given her the utmost concern. “Indeed,” added she, “I cannot help saying
he hath some merit in the service, for he hath received two dreadful
wounds in it, one of which very greatly endangered his life; and I am
convinced, if his pretensions were backed with any interest, he would
not fail of success.”

“They shall be backed with interest,” cries Mrs. James, “if my husband
hath any. He hath no favour to ask for himself, nor for any other friend
that I know of; and, indeed, to grant a man his just due, ought hardly
to be thought a favour. Resume your old gaiety, therefore, my dear
Emily. Lord! I remember the time when you was much the gayer creature of
the two. But you make an arrant mope of yourself by confining yourself
at home--one never meets you anywhere. Come, you shall go with me to the
Lady Betty Castleton’s.”

“Indeed, you must excuse me, my dear,” answered Amelia, “I do not know
Lady Betty.”

“Not know Lady Betty! how, is that possible?--but no matter, I will
introduce you. She keeps a morning rout; hardly a rout, indeed; a little
bit of a drum--only four or five tables. Come, take your capuchine; you
positively shall go. Booth, you shall go with us too. Though you are
with your wife, another woman will keep you in countenance.”

“La! child,” cries Amelia, “how you rattle!”

“I am in spirits,” answered Mrs. James, “this morning; for I won four
rubbers together last night; and betted the things, and won almost every
bet. I am in luck, and we will contrive to be partners--Come.”

“Nay, child, you shall not refuse Mrs. James,” said Booth.

“I have scarce seen my children to-day,” answered Amelia. “Besides, I
mortally detest cards.”

“Detest cards!” cries Mrs. James. “How can you be so stupid? I would not
live a day without them--nay, indeed, I do not believe I should be
able to exist. Is there so delightful a sight in the world as the
four honours in one’s own hand, unless it be three natural aces at
bragg?--And you really hate cards?”

“Upon reflexion,” cries Amelia, “I have sometimes had great pleasure in
them--in seeing my children build houses with them. My little boy is so
dexterous that he will sometimes build up the whole pack.”

“Indeed, Booth,” cries Mrs. James, “this good woman of yours is
strangely altered since I knew her first; but she will always be a good
creature.”

“Upon my word, my dear,” cries Amelia, “you are altered too very
greatly; but I doubt not to live to see you alter again, when you come
to have as many children as I have.”

“Children!” cries Mrs. James; “you make me shudder. How can you envy me
the only circumstance which makes matrimony comfortable?”

“Indeed, my dear,” said Amelia, “you injure me; for I envy no woman’s
happiness in marriage.” At these words such looks past between Booth and
his wife as, to a sensible by-stander, would have made all the airs of
Mrs. James appear in the highest degree contemptible, and would have
rendered herself the object of compassion. Nor could that lady avoid
looking a little silly on the occasion.

Amelia now, at the earnest desire of her husband, accoutred herself to
attend her friend; but first she insisted on visiting her children, to
whom she gave several hearty kisses, and then, recommending them to the
care of Mrs. Atkinson, she and her husband accompanied Mrs. James to the
rout; where few of my fine readers will be displeased to make part of
the company.

The two ladies and Booth then entered an apartment beset with
card-tables, like the rooms at Bath and Tunbridge. Mrs. James
immediately introduced her friends to Lady Betty, who received them very
civily, and presently engaged Booth and Mrs. James in a party at whist;
for, as to Amelia, she so much declined playing, that as the party could
be filled without her, she was permitted to sit by.

And now, who should make his appearance but the noble peer of whom
so much honourable mention hath already been made in this history?
He walked directly up to Amelia, and addressed her with as perfect a
confidence as if he had not been in the least conscious of having in any
manner displeased her; though the reader will hardly suppose that Mrs.
Ellison had kept anything a secret from him.

Amelia was not, however, so forgetful. She made him a very distant
courtesy, would scarce vouchsafe an answer to anything he said, and took
the first opportunity of shifting her chair and retiring from him.

Her behaviour, indeed, was such that the peer plainly perceived that he
should get no advantage by pursuing her any farther at present. Instead,
therefore, of attempting to follow her, he turned on his heel and
addressed his discourse to another lady, though he could not avoid often
casting his eyes towards Amelia as long as she remained in the room.

Fortune, which seems to have been generally no great friend to Mr.
Booth, gave him no extraordinary marks of her favour at play. He lost
two full rubbers, which cost him five guineas; after which, Amelia, who
was uneasy at his lordship’s presence, begged him in a whisper to return
home; with which request he directly complied.

Nothing, I think, remarkable happened to Booth, unless the renewal of
his acquaintance with an officer whom he had known abroad, and who made
one of his party at the whist-table.

The name of this gentleman, with whom the reader will hereafter be
better acquainted, was Trent. He had formerly been in the same regiment
with Booth, and there was some intimacy between them. Captain Trent
exprest great delight in meeting his brother officer, and both mutually
promised to visit each other.

The scenes which had past the preceding night and that morning had so
confused Amelia’s thoughts, that, in the hurry in which she was carried
off by Mrs. James, she had entirely forgot her appointment with Dr
Harrison. When she was informed at her return home that the doctor had
been to wait upon her, and had expressed some anger at her being gone
out, she became greatly uneasy, and begged of her husband to go to the
doctor’s lodgings and make her apology.

But lest the reader should be as angry with the doctor as he had
declared himself with Amelia, we think proper to explain the matter.
Nothing then was farther from the doctor’s mind than the conception of
any anger towards Amelia. On the contrary, when the girl answered him
that her mistress was not at home, the doctor said with great good
humour, “How! not at home! then tell your mistress she is a giddy
vagabond, and I will come to see her no more till she sends for me.”
 This the poor girl, from misunderstanding one word, and half forgetting
the rest, had construed into great passion, several very bad words, and
a declaration that he would never see Amelia any more.



