
_A scene of modern wit and humour._


In the afternoon the old gentleman proposed a walk to Vauxhall, a place
of which, he said, he had heard much, but had never seen it.

The doctor readily agreed to his friend’s proposal, and soon after
ordered two coaches to be sent for to carry the whole company. But when
the servant was gone for them Booth acquainted the doctor that it was
yet too early. “Is it so?” said the doctor; “why, then, I will carry you
first to one of the greatest and highest entertainments in the world.”

The children pricked up their ears at this, nor did any of the company
guess what he meant; and Amelia asked what entertainment he could carry
them to at that time of day?

“Suppose,” says the doctor, “I should carry you to court.”

“At five o’clock in the afternoon!” cries Booth.

“Ay, suppose I should have interest enough to introduce you into the
presence.”

“You are jesting, dear sir,” cries Amelia.

“Indeed, I am serious,” answered the doctor. “I will introduce you into
that presence, compared to whom the greatest emperor on the earth is
many millions of degrees meaner than the most contemptible reptile is to
him. What entertainment can there be to a rational being equal to this?
Was not the taste of mankind most wretchedly depraved, where would the
vain man find an honour, or where would the love of pleasure propose
so adequate an object as divine worship? with what ecstasy must the
contemplation of being admitted to such a presence fill the mind!
The pitiful courts of princes are open to few, and to those only at
particular seasons; but from this glorious and gracious presence we are
none of us, and at no time excluded.”

The doctor was proceeding thus when the servant returned, saying the
coaches were ready; and the whole company with the greatest alacrity
attended the doctor to St James’s church.

When the service was ended, and they were again got into their coaches,
Amelia returned the doctor many thanks for the light in which he had
placed divine worship, assuring him that she had never before had so
much transport in her devotion as at this time, and saying she believed
she should be the better for this notion he had given her as long as she
lived.

The coaches being come to the water-side, they all alighted, and,
getting into one boat, proceeded to Vauxhall.

The extreme beauty and elegance of this place is well known to almost
every one of my readers; and happy is it for me that it is so, since
to give an adequate idea of it would exceed my power of description.
To delineate the particular beauties of these gardens would, indeed,
require as much pains, and as much paper too, as to rehearse all
the good actions of their master, whose life proves the truth of an
observation which I have read in some ethic writer, that a truly elegant
taste is generally accompanied with an excellency of heart; or, in other
words, that true virtue is, indeed, nothing else but true taste.

Here our company diverted themselves with walking an hour or two before
the music began. Of all the seven, Booth alone had ever been here
before; so that, to all the rest, the place, with its other charms, had
that of novelty. When the music played, Amelia, who stood next to
the doctor, said to him in a whisper, “I hope I am not guilty of
profaneness; but, in pursuance of that chearful chain of thoughts with
which you have inspired me this afternoon, I was just now lost in a
reverie, and fancied myself in those blissful mansions which we hope to
enjoy hereafter. The delicious sweetness of the place, the enchanting
charms of the music, and the satisfaction which appears in every one’s
countenance, carried my soul almost to heaven in its ideas. I could not
have, indeed, imagined there had been anything like this in this world.”

The doctor smiled, and said, “You see, dear madam, there may be
pleasures of which you could conceive no idea till you actually enjoyed
them.”

And now the little boy, who had long withstood the attractions of
several cheesecakes that passed to and fro, could contain no longer, but
asked his mother to give him one, saying, “I am sure my sister would be
glad of another, though she is ashamed to ask.” The doctor, overhearing
the child, proposed that they should all retire to some place where
they might sit down and refresh themselves; which they accordingly did.
Amelia now missed her husband; but, as she had three men in her company,
and one of them was the doctor, she concluded herself and her children
to be safe, and doubted not but that Booth would soon find her out.

They now sat down, and the doctor very gallantly desired Amelia to call
for what she liked. Upon which the children were supplied with cakes,
and some ham and chicken were provided for the rest of the company; with
which while they were regaling themselves with the highest satisfaction,
two young fellows walking arm-in-arm, came up, and when they came
opposite to Amelia they stood still, staring Amelia full in the face,
and one of them cried aloud to the other, “D--n me, my lord, if she is
not an angel!”--My lord stood still, staring likewise at her, without
speaking a word; when two others of the same gang came up, and one of
them cried, “Come along, Jack, I have seen her before; but she is too
well manned already. Three----are enough for one woman, or the devil is
in it!”

“D--n me,” says he that spoke first, and whom they called Jack, “I will
have a brush at her if she belonged to the whole convocation.” And so
saying, he went up to the young clergyman, and cried, “Doctor, sit up a
little, if you please, and don’t take up more room in a bed than belongs
to you.” At which words he gave the young man a push, and seated himself
down directly over against Amelia, and, leaning both his elbows on
the table, he fixed his eyes on her in a manner with which modesty can
neither look nor bear to be looked at.

Amelia seemed greatly shocked at this treatment; upon which the doctor
removed her within him, and then, facing the gentleman, asked him what
he meant by this rude behaviour?--Upon which my lord stept up and said,
“Don’t be impertinent, old gentleman. Do you think such fellows as you
are to keep, d--n me, such fine wenches, d--n me, to yourselves, d--n
me?”

“No, no,” cries Jack, “the old gentleman is more reasonable. Here’s the
fellow that eats up the tithe-pig. Don’t you see how his mouth waters at
her? Where’s your slabbering bib?” For, though the gentleman had rightly
guessed he was a clergyman, yet he had not any of those insignia on with
which it would have been improper to have appeared there.

“Such boys as you,” cries the young clergyman, “ought to be well whipped
at school, instead of being suffered to become nuisances in society.”

“Boys, sir!” says Jack; “I believe I am as good a man as yourself,
Mr.----, and as good a scholar too. _Bos fur sus quotque sacerdos_. Tell
me what’s next. D--n me, I’ll hold you fifty pounds you don’t tell me
what’s next.”

“You have him, Jack,” cries my lord. “It is over with him, d--n me! he
can’t strike another blow.”

“If I had you in a proper place,” cries the clergyman, “you should find
I would strike a blow, and a pretty hard one too.”

“There,” cries my lord, “there is the meekness of the clergyman--there
spoke the wolf in sheep’s clothing. D--n me, how big he looks! You must
be civil to him, faith! or else he will burst with pride.”

“Ay, ay,” cries Jack, “let the clergy alone for pride; there’s not a
lord in the kingdom now hath half the pride of that fellow.”

“Pray, sir,” cries the doctor, turning to the other, “are you a lord?”

“Yes, Mr. ----,” cries he, “I have that honour, indeed.”

“And I suppose you have pride too,” said the doctor.

“I hope I have, sir,” answered he, “at your service.”

“If such a one as you, sir,” cries the doctor, “who are not only a
scandal to the title you bear as a lord, but even as a man, can pretend
to pride, why will you not allow it to a clergyman? I suppose, sir, by
your dress, you are in the army? and, by the ribbon in your hat, you
seem to be proud of that too. How much greater and more honourable is
the service in which that gentleman is enlisted than yours! Why then
should you object to the pride of the clergy, since the lowest of the
function is in reality every way so much your superior?”

“Tida Tidu Tidum,” cries my lord.

“However, gentlemen,” cries the doctor, “if you have the least
pretension to that name, I beg you will put an end to your frolic; since
you see it gives so much uneasiness to the lady. Nay, I entreat you for
your own sakes, for here is one coming who will talk to you in a very
different stile from ours.”

“One coming!” cries my lord; “what care I who is coming?”

“I suppose it is the devil,” cries Jack; “for here are two of his livery
servants already.”

“Let the devil come as soon as he will,” cries my lord; “d--n me if I
have not a kiss!”

Amelia now fell a trembling; and her children, perceiving her fright,
both hung on her, and began to cry; when Booth and Captain Trent both
came up.

Booth, seeing his wife disordered, asked eagerly what was the matter?
At the same time the lord and his companion, seeing Captain Trent, whom
they well knew, said both together, “What, doth this company belong
to you?” When the doctor, with great presence of mind, as he was
apprehensive of some fatal consequence if Booth should know what had
past, said, “So, Mr. Booth, I am glad you are returned; your poor lady
here began to be frighted out of her wits. But now you have him again,”
 said he to Amelia, “I hope you will be easy.”

Amelia, frighted as she was, presently took the hint, and greatly
chid her husband for leaving her. But the little boy was not so
quick-sighted, and cried, “Indeed, papa, those naughty men there have
frighted my mamma out of her wits.”

“How!” cries Booth, a little moved; “frightened! Hath any one frightened
you, my dear?”

“No, my love,” answered she, “nothing. I know not what the child means.
Everything is well now I see you safe.”

Trent had been all the while talking aside with the young sparks; and
now, addressing himself to Booth, said, “Here hath been some little
mistake; I believe my lord mistook Mrs. Booth for some other lady.”

“It is impossible,” cries my lord, “to know every one. I am sure, if
I had known the lady to be a woman of fashion, and an acquaintance of
Captain Trent, I should have said nothing disagreeable to her; but, if I
have, I ask her pardon, and the company’s.”

“I am in the dark,” cries Booth. “Pray what is all this matter?”

“Nothing of any consequence,” cries the doctor, “nor worth your
enquiring into. You hear it was a mistake of the person, and I really
believe his lordship that all proceeded from his not knowing to whom the
lady belonged.”

“Come, come,” says Trent, “there is nothing in the matter, I assure you.
I will tell you the whole another time.”

“Very well; since you say so,” cries Booth, “I am contented.” So ended
the affair, and the two sparks made their congee, and sneaked off.

“Now they are gone,” said the young gentleman, “I must say I never saw
two worse-bred jackanapes, nor fellows that deserved to be kicked more.
If I had had them in another place I would have taught them a little
more respect to the church.”

“You took rather a better way,” answered the doctor, “to teach them that
respect.”

Booth now desired his friend Trent to sit down with them, and proposed
to call for a fresh bottle of wine; but Amelia’s spirits were too much
disconcerted to give her any prospect of pleasure that evening. She
therefore laid hold of the pretence of her children, for whom she said
the hour was already too late; with which the doctor agreed. So they
paid their reckoning and departed, leaving to the two rakes the triumph
of having totally dissipated the mirth of this little innocent company,
who were before enjoying complete satisfaction.



