
_A curious conversation between the doctor, the young clergyman, and the
young clergyman’s father_.


The next morning, when the doctor and his two friends were at breakfast,
the young clergyman, in whose mind the injurious treatment he had
received the evening before was very deeply impressed, renewed the
conversation on that subject.

“It is a scandal,” said he, “to the government, that they do not
preserve more respect to the clergy, by punishing all rudeness to them
with the utmost severity. It was very justly observed of you, sir,”
 said he to the doctor, “that the lowest clergyman in England is in real
dignity superior to the highest nobleman. What then can be so shocking
as to see that gown, which ought to entitle us to the veneration of
all we meet, treated with contempt and ridicule? Are we not, in fact,
ambassadors from heaven to the world? and do they not, therefore, in
denying us our due respect, deny it in reality to Him that sent us?”

“If that be the case,” says the doctor, “it behoves them to look to
themselves; for He who sent us is able to exact most severe vengeance
for the ill treatment of His ministers.”

“Very true, sir,” cries the young one; “and I heartily hope He will;
but those punishments are at too great a distance to infuse terror
into wicked minds. The government ought to interfere with its immediate
censures. Fines and imprisonments and corporal punishments operate more
forcibly on the human mind than all the fears of damnation.”

“Do you think so?” cries the doctor; “then I am afraid men are very
little in earnest in those fears.”

“Most justly observed,” says the old gentleman. “Indeed, I am afraid
that is too much the case.”

“In that,” said the son, “the government is to blame. Are not books
of infidelity, treating our holy religion as a mere imposture, nay,
sometimes as a mere jest, published daily, and spread abroad amongst the
people with perfect impunity?”

“You are certainly in the right,” says the doctor; “there is a most
blameable remissness with regard to these matters; but the whole blame
doth not lie there; some little share of the fault is, I am afraid, to
be imputed to the clergy themselves.”

“Indeed, sir,” cries the young one, “I did not expect that charge from
a gentleman of your cloth. Do the clergy give any encouragement to
such books? Do they not, on the contrary, cry loudly out against the
suffering them? This is the invidious aspersion of the laity; and I did
not expect to hear it confirmed by one of our own cloth.”

“Be not too impatient, young gentleman,” said the doctor. “I do not
absolutely confirm the charge of the laity; it is much too general and
too severe; but even the laity themselves do not attack them in that
part to which you have applied your defence. They are not supposed
such fools as to attack that religion to which they owe their temporal
welfare. They are not taxed with giving any other support to infidelity
than what it draws from the ill examples of their lives; I mean of the
lives of some of them. Here too the laity carry their censures too far;
for there are very few or none of the clergy whose lives, if compared
with those of the laity, can be called profligate; but such, indeed,
is the perfect purity of our religion, such is the innocence and virtue
which it exacts to entitle us to its glorious rewards and to screen us
from its dreadful punishments, that he must be a very good man indeed
who lives up to it. Thus then these persons argue. This man is educated
in a perfect knowledge of religion, is learned in its laws, and is by
his profession obliged, in a manner, to have them always before his
eyes. The rewards which it promises to the obedience of these laws are
so great, and the punishments threatened on disobedience so dreadful,
that it is impossible but all men must fearfully fly from the one,
and as eagerly pursue the other. If, therefore, such a person lives
in direct opposition to, and in a constant breach of, these laws, the
inference is obvious. There is a pleasant story in Matthew Paris, which
I will tell you as well as I can remember it. Two young gentlemen,
I think they were priests, agreed together that whosoever died first
should return and acquaint his friend with the secrets of the other
world. One of them died soon after, and fulfilled his promise. The
whole relation he gave is not very material; but, among other things, he
produced one of his hands, which Satan had made use of to write upon,
as the moderns do on a card, and had sent his compliments to the priests
for the number of souls which the wicked examples of their lives daily
sent to hell. This story is the more remarkable as it was written by a
priest, and a great favourer of his order.”

“Excellent!” cried the old gentleman; “what a memory you have.”

“But, sir,” cries the young one, “a clergyman is a man as well as
another; and, if such perfect purity be expected--”

“I do not expect it,” cries the doctor; “and I hope it will not be
expected of us. The Scripture itself gives us this hope, where the best
of us are said to fall twenty times a-day. But sure we may not allow
the practice of any of those grosser crimes which contaminate the
whole mind. We may expect an obedience to the ten commandments, and an
abstinence from such notorious vices as, in the first place,
Avarice, which, indeed, can hardly subsist without the breach of more
commandments than one. Indeed, it would be excessive candour to imagine
that a man who so visibly sets his whole heart, not only on this world,
but on one of the most worthless things in it (for so is money, without
regard to its uses), should be, at the same time, laying up his treasure
in heaven. Ambition is a second vice of this sort: we are told we cannot
serve God and Mammon. I might have applied this to avarice; but I chose
rather to mention it here. When we see a man sneaking about in courts
and levees, and doing the dirty work of great men, from the hopes of
preferment, can we believe that a fellow whom we see to have so many
hard task-masters upon earth ever thinks of his Master which is in
heaven? Must he not himself think, if ever he reflects at all, that so
glorious a Master will disdain and disown a servant who is the dutiful
tool of a court-favourite, and employed either as the pimp of his
pleasure, or sometimes, perhaps, made a dirty channel to assist in the
conveyance of that corruption which is clogging up and destroying the
very vitals of his country?

“The last vice which I shall mention is Pride. There is not in the
universe a more ridiculous nor a more contemptible animal than a proud
clergyman; a turkey-cock or a jackdaw are objects of veneration when
compared with him. I don’t mean, by Pride, that noble dignity of mind to
which goodness can only administer an adequate object, which delights in
the testimony of its own conscience, and could not, without the highest
agonies, bear its condemnation. By Pride I mean that saucy passion which
exults in every little eventual pre-eminence over other men: such are
the ordinary gifts of nature, and the paultry presents of fortune,
wit, knowledge, birth, strength, beauty, riches, titles, and rank. That
passion which is ever aspiring, like a silly child, to look over the
heads of all about them; which, while it servilely adheres to the great,
flies from the poor, as if afraid of contamination; devouring greedily
every murmur of applause and every look of admiration; pleased and
elated with all kind of respect; and hurt and enflamed with the contempt
of the lowest and most despicable of fools, even with such as treated
you last night disrespectfully at Vauxhall. Can such a mind as this be
fixed on things above? Can such a man reflect that he hath the ineffable
honour to be employed in the immediate service of his great Creator?
or can he please himself with the heart-warming hope that his ways are
acceptable in the sight of that glorious, that incomprehensible Being?”

“Hear, child, hear,” cries the old gentleman; “hear, and improve your
understanding. Indeed, my good friend, no one retires from you without
carrying away some good instructions with him. Learn of the doctor, Tom,
and you will be the better man as long as you live.”

“Undoubtedly, sir,” answered Tom, “the doctor hath spoken a great deal
of excellent truth; and, without a compliment to him, I was always a
great admirer of his sermons, particularly of their oratory. But,

    _Nee tamen hoc tribuens dederim quoque caetera_.

I cannot agree that a clergyman is obliged to put up with an affront
any more than another man, and more especially when it is paid to the
order.”

“I am very sorry, young gentleman,” cries the doctor, “that you should
be ever liable to be affronted as a clergyman; and I do assure you, if
I had known your disposition formerly, the order should never have been
affronted through you.”

The old gentleman now began to check his son for his opposition to the
doctor, when a servant delivered the latter a note from Amelia, which he
read immediately to himself, and it contained the following words:

“MY DEAR SIR,--Something hath happened since I saw you which gives me
great uneasiness, and I beg the favour of seeing you as soon as possible
to advise with you upon it. I am

“Your most obliged and dutiful daughter,

“AMELIA BOOTH.”

The doctor’s answer was, that he would wait on the lady directly; and
then, turning to his friend, he asked him if he would not take a walk in
the Park before dinner. “I must go,” says he, “to the lady who was with
us last night; for I am afraid, by her letter, some bad accident hath
happened to her. Come, young gentleman, I spoke a little too hastily to
you just now; but I ask your pardon. Some allowance must be made to the
warmth of your blood. I hope we shall, in time, both think alike.”

The old gentleman made his friend another compliment; and the young one
declared he hoped he should always think, and act too, with the dignity
becoming his cloth. After which the doctor took his leave for a while,
and went to Amelia’s lodgings.

As soon as he was gone the old gentleman fell very severely on his
son. “Tom,” says he, “how can you be such a fool to undo, by your
perverseness, all that I have been doing? Why will you not learn to
study mankind with the attention which I have employed to that purpose?
Do you think, if I had affronted this obstinate old fellow as you do, I
should ever have engaged his friendship?”

“I cannot help it, sir,” said Tom: “I have not studied six years at the
university to give up my sentiments to every one. It is true, indeed,
he put together a set of sounding words; but, in the main, I never heard
any one talk more foolishly.”

“What of that?” cries the father; “I never told you he was a wise man,
nor did I ever think him so. If he had any understanding, he would have
been a bishop long ago, to my certain knowledge. But, indeed, he hath
been always a fool in private life; for I question whether he is worth
L100 in the world, more than his annual income. He hath given away above
half his fortune to the Lord knows who. I believe I have had above L200
of him, first and last; and would you lose such a milch-cow as this for
want of a few compliments? Indeed, Tom, thou art as great a simpleton as
himself. How do you expect to rise in the church if you cannot temporise
and give in to the opinions of your superiors?”

“I don’t know, sir,” cries Tom, “what you mean by my superiors. In one
sense, I own, a doctor of divinity is superior to a bachelor of arts,
and so far I am ready to allow his superiority; but I understand Greek
and Hebrew as well as he, and will maintain my opinion against him, or
any other in the schools.”

“Tom,” cries the old gentleman, “till thou gettest the better of thy
conceit I shall never have any hopes of thee. If thou art wise, thou
wilt think every man thy superior of whom thou canst get anything;
at least thou wilt persuade him that thou thinkest so, and that is
sufficient. Tom, Tom, thou hast no policy in thee.”

“What have I been learning these seven years,” answered he, “in the
university? However, father, I can account for your opinion. It is the
common failing of old men to attribute all wisdom to themselves. Nestor
did it long ago: but, if you will inquire my character at college, I
fancy you will not think I want to go to school again.”

The father and son then went to take their walk, during which the former
repeated many good lessons of policy to his son, not greatly perhaps to
his edification. In truth, if the old gentleman’s fondness had not in a
great measure blinded him to the imperfections of his son, he would
have soon perceived that he was sowing all his instructions in a soil
so choaked with self-conceit that it was utterly impossible they should
ever bear any fruit.




BOOK X.


