
_The history of Mr. Trent._


We will now return to Mr. Booth and his wife. The former had spent his
time very uneasily ever since he had discovered what sort of man he was
indebted to; but, lest he should forget it, Mr. Trent thought now proper
to remind him in the following letter, which he read the next morning
after he had put off the appointment.

“SIR,--I am sorry the necessity of my affairs obliges me to mention that
small sum which I had the honour to lend you the other night at play;
and which I shall be much obliged to you if you will let me have some
time either to-day or to-morrow. I am, sir, Your most obedient, most
humble servant, GEORGE TRENT.”

This letter a little surprized Booth, after the genteel, and, indeed,
as it appeared, generous behaviour of Trent. But lest it should have the
same effect upon the reader, we will now proceed to account for this, as
well as for some other phenomena that have appeared in this history, and
which, perhaps, we shall be forgiven for not having opened more largely
before.

Mr. Trent then was a gentleman possibly of a good family, for it was not
certain whence he sprung on the father’s side. His mother, who was the
only parent he ever knew or heard of, was a single gentlewoman, and for
some time carried on the trade of a milliner in Covent-garden. She sent
her son, at the age of eight years old, to a charity-school, where he
remained till he was of the age of fourteen, without making any great
proficiency in learning. Indeed it is not very probable he should; for
the master, who, in preference to a very learned and proper man, was
chosen by a party into this school, the salary of which was upwards of
a hundred pounds a-year, had himself never travelled through the Latin
Grammar, and was, in truth, a most consummate blockhead.

At the age of fifteen Mr. Trent was put clerk to an attorney, where he
remained a very short time before he took leave of his master; rather,
indeed, departed without taking leave; and, having broke open his
mother’s escritore, and carried off with him all the valuable effects he
there found, to the amount of about fifty pounds, he marched off to sea,
and went on board a merchantman, whence he was afterwards pressed into a
man of war.

In this service he continued above three years; during which time he
behaved so ill in his moral character that he twice underwent a very
severe discipline for thefts in which he was detected; but at the same
time, he behaved so well as a sailor in an engagement with some pirates,
that he wiped off all former scores, and greatly recommended himself to
his captain.

At his return home, he being then about twenty years of age, he found
that the attorney had in his absence married his mother, had buried her,
and secured all her effects, to the amount, as he was informed, of
about fifteen hundred pound. Trent applied to his stepfather, but to no
purpose; the attorney utterly disowned him, nor would he suffer him to
come a second time within his doors.

It happened that the attorney had, by a former wife, an only daughter, a
great favourite, who was about the same age with Trent himself, and had,
during his residence at her father’s house, taken a very great liking to
this young fellow, who was extremely handsome and perfectly well made.
This her liking was not, during his absence, so far extinguished but
that it immediately revived on his return. Of this she took care to give
Mr. Trent proper intimation; for she was not one of those backward and
delicate ladies who can die rather than make the first overture. Trent
was overjoyed at this, and with reason, for she was a very lovely girl
in her person, the only child of a rich father; and the prospect of so
complete a revenge on the attorney charmed him above all the rest. To be
as short in the matter as the parties, a marriage was soon consummated
between them.

The attorney at first raged and was implacable; but at last fondness for
his daughter so far overcame resentment that he advanced a sum of money
to buy his son-in-law (for now he acknowledged him as such) an ensign’s
commission in a marching regiment then ordered to Gibraltar; at which
place the attorney heartily hoped that Trent might be knocked on the
head; for in that case he thought he might marry his daughter more
agreeably to his own ambition and to her advantage.

The regiment into which Trent purchased was the same with that in
which Booth likewise served; the one being an ensign, and the other a
lieutenant, in the two additional companies.

Trent had no blemish in his military capacity. Though he had had but
an indifferent education, he was naturally sensible and genteel, and
Nature, as we have said, had given him a very agreeable person. He was
likewise a very bold fellow, and, as he really behaved himself every way
well enough while he was at Gibraltar, there was some degree of intimacy
between him and Booth.

When the siege was over, and the additional companies were again
reduced, Trent returned to his wife, who received him with great joy and
affection. Soon after this an accident happened which proved the utter
ruin of his father-in-law, and ended in breaking his heart. This was
nothing but making a mistake pretty common at this day, of writing
another man’s name to a deed instead of his own. In truth this matter
was no less than what the law calls forgery, and was just then made
capital by an act of parliament. From this offence, indeed, the attorney
was acquitted, by not admitting the proof of the party, who was to avoid
his own deed by his evidence, and therefore no witness, according to
those excellent rules called the law of evidence; a law very excellently
calculated for the preservation of the lives of his majesty’s roguish
subjects, and most notably used for that purpose.

But though by common law the attorney was honourably acquitted, yet, as
common sense manifested to every one that he was guilty, he unhappily
lost his reputation, and of consequence his business; the chagrin of
which latter soon put an end to his life.

This prosecution had been attended with a very great expence; for,
besides the ordinary costs of avoiding the gallows by the help of the
law, there was a very high article, of no less than a thousand pounds,
paid down to remove out of the way a witness against whom there was no
legal exception. The poor gentleman had besides suffered some losses
in business; so that, to the surprize of all his acquaintance, when his
debts were paid there remained no more than a small estate of fourscore
pounds a-year, which he settled upon his daughter, far out of the reach
of her husband, and about two hundred pounds in money.

The old gentleman had not long been in his grave before Trent set
himself to consider seriously of the state of his affairs. He had lately
begun to look on his wife with a much less degree of liking and desire
than formerly; for he was one of those who think too much of one thing
is good for nothing. Indeed, he had indulged these speculations so far,
that I believe his wife, though one of the prettiest women in town, was
the last subject that he would have chose for any amorous dalliance.

Many other persons, however, greatly differed from him in his opinion.
Amongst the rest was the illustrious peer of amorous memory. This noble
peer, having therefore got a view of Mrs. Trent one day in the street,
did, by means of an emissary then with him, make himself acquainted with
her lodging, to which he immediately laid siege in form, setting himself
down in a lodging directly opposite to her, from whence the battery of
ogles began to play the very next morning.

This siege had not continued long before the governor of the garrison
became sufficiently apprized of all the works which were carrying on,
and, having well reconnoitered the enemy, and discovered who he was,
notwithstanding a false name and some disguise of his person, he called
a council of war within his own breast. In fact, to drop all allegory,
he began to consider whether his wife was not really a more valuable
possession than he had lately thought her. In short, as he had been
disappointed in her fortune, he now conceived some hopes of turning her
beauty itself into a fortune.

Without communicating these views to her, he soon scraped an
acquaintance with his opposite neighbour by the name which he there
usurped, and counterfeited an entire ignorance of his real name and
title. On this occasion Trent had his disguise likewise, for he affected
the utmost simplicity; of which affectation, as he was a very artful
fellow, he was extremely capable.

The peer fell plumb into this snare; and when, by the simplicity, as he
imagined, of the husband, he became acquainted with the wife, he was so
extravagantly charmed with her person, that he resolved, whatever was
the cost or the consequence, he would possess her.

His lordship, however, preserved some caution in his management of this
affair; more, perhaps, than was necessary. As for the husband, none
was requisite, for he knew all he could; and, with regard to the
wife herself, as she had for some time perceived the decrease of her
husband’s affection (for few women are, I believe, to be imposed upon
in that matter), she was not displeased to find the return of all that
complaisance and endearment, of those looks and languishments, from
another agreeable person, which she had formerly received from Trent,
and which she now found she should receive from him no longer.

My lord, therefore, having been indulged with as much opportunity as
he could wish from Trent, and having received rather more encouragement
than he could well have hoped from the lady, began to prepare all
matters for a storm, when luckily, Mr. Trent declaring he must go out
of town for two days, he fixed on the first day of his departure as the
time of carrying his design into execution.

And now, after some debate with himself in what manner he should
approach his love, he at last determined to do it in his own person; for
he conceived, and perhaps very rightly, that the lady, like Semele, was
not void of ambition, and would have preferred Jupiter in all his glory
to the same deity in the disguise of an humble shepherd. He dressed
himself, therefore, in the richest embroidery of which he was master,
and appeared before his mistress arrayed in all the brightness of
peerage; a sight whose charms she had not the power to resist, and the
consequences are only to be imagined. In short, the same scene which
Jupiter acted with his above-mentioned mistress of old was more than
beginning, when Trent burst from the closet into which he had conveyed
himself, and unkindly interrupted the action.

His lordship presently run to his sword; but Trent, with great calmness,
answered, “That, as it was very well known he durst fight, he should not
draw his sword on this occasion; for sure,” says he, “my lord, it would
be the highest imprudence in me to kill a man who is now become so
considerably my debtor.” At which words he fetched a person from the
closet, who had been confined with him, telling him he had done his
business, and might now, if he pleased, retire.

It would be tedious here to amuse the reader with all that passed on the
present occasion; the rage and confusion of the wife, or the perplexity
in which my lord was involved. We will omit therefore all such matters,
and proceed directly to business, as Trent and his lordship did soon
after. And in the conclusion my lord stipulated to pay a good round sum,
and to provide Mr. Trent with a good place on the first opportunity.

On the side of Mr. Trent were stipulated absolute remission of all past,
and full indulgence for the time to come.

Trent now immediately took a house at the polite end of the town,
furnished it elegantly, and set up his equipage, rigged out both himself
and his wife with very handsome cloaths, frequented all public places
where he could get admission, pushed himself into acquaintance, and his
wife soon afterwards began to keep an assembly, or, in the fashionable
phrase, to be at home once a-week; when, by my lord’s assistance, she
was presently visited by most men of the first rank, and by all such
women of fashion as are not very nice in their company.

My lord’s amour with this lady lasted not long; for, as we have before
observed, he was the most inconstant of all human race. Mrs. Trent’s
passion was not however of that kind which leads to any very deep
resentment of such fickleness. Her passion, indeed, was principally
founded upon interest; so that foundation served to support another
superstructure; and she was easily prevailed upon, as well as her
husband, to be useful to my lord in a capacity which, though very often
exerted in the polite world, hath not as yet, to my great surprize,
acquired any polite name, or, indeed, any which is not too coarse to be
admitted in this history.

After this preface, which we thought necessary to account for a
character of which some of my country and collegiate readers might
possibly doubt the existence, I shall proceed to what more immediately
regards Mrs. Booth. The reader may be pleased to remember that Mr. Trent
was present at the assembly to which Booth and his wife were carried by
Mrs. James, and where Amelia was met by the noble peer.

His lordship, seeing there that Booth and Trent were old acquaintance,
failed not, to use the language of sportsmen, to put Trent upon the
scent of Amelia. For this purpose that gentleman visited Booth the very
next day, and had pursued him close ever since. By his means, therefore,
my lord learned that Amelia was to be at the masquerade, to which place
she was dogged by Trent in a sailor’s jacket, who, meeting my lord,
according to agreement, at the entrance of the opera-house, like the
four-legged gentleman of the same vocation, made a dead point, as it is
called, at the game.

My lord was so satisfied and delighted with his conversation at the
masquerade with the supposed Amelia, and the encouragement which in
reality she had given him, that, when he saw Trent the next morning,
he embraced him with great fondness, gave him a bank note of a hundred
pound, and promised him both the Indies on his success, of which he
began now to have no manner of doubt.

The affair that happened at the gaming-table was likewise a scheme of
Trent’s, on a hint given by my lord to him to endeavour to lead Booth
into some scrape or distress; his lordship promising to pay whatever
expense Trent might be led into by such means. Upon his lordship’s
credit, therefore, the money lent to Booth was really advanced. And
hence arose all that seeming generosity and indifference as to the
payment; Trent being satisfied with the obligation conferred on Booth,
by means of which he hoped to effect his purpose.

But now the scene was totally changed; for Mrs. Atkinson, the morning
after the quarrel, beginning seriously to recollect that she had carried
the matter rather too far, and might really injure Amelia’s reputation,
a thought to which the warm pursuit of her own interest had a good deal
blinded her at the time, resolved to visit my lord himself, and to
let him into the whole story; for, as she had succeeded already in her
favourite point, she thought she had no reason to fear any consequence
of the discovery. This resolution she immediately executed.

Trent came to attend his lordship, just after Mrs. Atkinson had left
him. He found the peer in a very ill humour, and brought no news to
comfort or recruit his spirits; for he had himself just received
a billet from Booth, with an excuse for himself and his wife from
accepting the invitation at Trent’s house that evening, where matters
had been previously concerted for their entertainment, and when his
lordship was by accident to drop into the room where Amelia was, while
Booth was to be engaged at play in another.

And now after much debate, and after Trent had acquainted my lord with
the wretched situation of Booth’s circumstances, it was resolved that
Trent should immediately demand his money of Booth, and upon his not
paying it, for they both concluded it impossible he should pay it, to
put the note which Trent had for the money in suit against him by the
genteel means of paying it away to a nominal third person; and this
they both conceived must end immediately in the ruin of Booth, and,
consequently, in the conquest of Amelia.

In this project, and with this hope, both my lord and his setter, or (if
the sportsmen please) setting-dog, both greatly exulted; and it was next
morning executed, as we have already seen.



