
_Containing some distress._


Trent’s letter drove Booth almost to madness. To be indebted to such a
fellow at any rate had stuck much in his stomach, and had given him very
great uneasiness; but to answer this demand in any other manner than by
paying the money was absolutely what he could not bear. Again, to pay
this money, he very plainly saw there was but one way, and this was, by
stripping his wife, not only of every farthing, but almost of every rag
she had in the world; a thought so dreadful that it chilled his very
soul with horror: and yet pride, at last, seemed to represent this as
the lesser evil of the two.

But how to do this was still a question. It was not sure, at least he
feared it was not, that Amelia herself would readily consent to this;
and so far from persuading her to such a measure, he could not bear even
to propose it. At length his determination was to acquaint his wife with
the whole affair, and to ask her consent, by way of asking her advice;
for he was well assured she could find no other means of extricating him
out of his dilemma. This he accordingly did, representing the affair as
bad as he could; though, indeed, it was impossible for him to aggravate
the real truth.

Amelia heard him patiently, without once interrupting him. When he had
finished, she remained silent some time: indeed, the shock she received
from this story almost deprived her of the power of speaking. At last
she answered, “Well, my dear, you ask my advice; I certainly can give
you no other than that the money must be paid.”

“But how must it be paid?” cries he. “O, heavens! thou sweetest
creature! what, not once upbraid me for bringing this ruin on thee?”

“Upbraid you, my dear!” says she; “would to heaven I could prevent your
upbraiding yourself. But do not despair. I will endeavour by some means
or other to get you the money.”

“Alas! my dear love,” cries Booth, “I know the only way by which you
can raise it. How can I consent to that? do you forget the fears you so
lately expressed of what would be our wretched condition when our little
all was mouldered away? O my Amelia! they cut my very heart-strings when
you spoke then; for I had then lost this little all. Indeed, I assure
you, I have not played since, nor ever will more.”

“Keep that resolution,” said she, “my dear, and I hope we shall yet
recover the past.”--At which words, casting her eyes on the children,
the tears burst from her eyes, and she cried--“Heaven will, I hope,
provide for us.”

A pathetic scene now ensued between the husband and wife, which would
not, perhaps, please many readers to see drawn at too full a length. It
is sufficient to say that this excellent woman not only used her utmost
endeavours to stifle and conceal her own concern, but said and did
everything in her power to allay that of her husband.

Booth was, at this time, to meet a person whom we have formerly
mentioned in the course of our history. This gentleman had a place
in the War-office, and pretended to be a man of great interest and
consequence; by which means he did not only receive great respect and
court from the inferiour officers, but actually bubbled several of their
money, by undertaking to do them services which, in reality, were not
within his power. In truth, I have known few great men who have not been
beset with one or more such fellows as these, through whom the inferior
part of mankind are obliged to make their court to the great men
themselves; by which means, I believe, principally, persons of real
merit have often been deterred from the attempt; for these subaltern
coxcombs ever assume an equal state with their masters, and look for an
equal degree of respect to be paid to them; to which men of spirit,
who are in every light their betters, are not easily brought to submit.
These fellows, indeed, themselves have a jealous eye towards all great
abilities, and are sure, to the utmost of their power, to keep all
who are so endowed from the presence of their masters. They use their
masters as bad ministers have sometimes used a prince--they keep all men
of merit from his ears, and daily sacrifice his true honour and interest
to their own profit and their own vanity.

As soon as Booth was gone to his appointment with this man, Amelia
immediately betook herself to her business with the highest resolution.
She packed up, not only her own little trinkets, and those of the
children, but the greatest part of her own poor cloathes (for she was
but barely provided), and then drove in a hackney-coach to the same
pawnbroker’s who had before been recommended to her by Mrs. Atkinson,
who advanced her the money she desired.

Being now provided with her sum, she returned well pleased home, and her
husband coming in soon after, she with much chearfulness delivered him
all the money.

Booth was so overjoyed with the prospect of discharging his debt to
Trent, that he did not perfectly reflect on the distress to which
his family was now reduced. The good-humour which appeared in the
countenance of Amelia was, perhaps, another help to stifle those
reflexions; but above all, were the assurances he had received from the
great man, whom he had met at a coffee-house, and who had promised to
do him all the service in his power; which several half-pay subaltern
officers assured him was very considerable.

With this comfortable news he acquainted his wife, who either was, or
seemed to be, extremely well pleased with it. And now he set out with
the money in his pocket to pay his friend Trent, who unluckily for him
happened not to be at home.

On his return home he met his old friend the lieutenant, who thankfully
paid him his crown, and insisted on his going with him and taking part
of a bottle. This invitation was so eager and pressing, that poor Booth,
who could not resist much importunity, complied.

While they were over this bottle Booth acquainted his friend with the
promises he had received that afternoon at the coffee-house, with which
the old gentleman was very well pleased: “For I have heard,” says
he, “that gentleman hath very powerful interest;” but he informed him
likewise that he had heard that the great man must be touched, for that
he never did anything without touching. Of this, indeed, the great man
himself had given some oblique hints, by saying, with great sagacity
and slyness, that he knew where fifty pound might be deposited to much
advantage.

Booth answered that he would very readily advance a small sum if he had
it in his power, but that at present it was not so, for that he had no
more in the world than the sum of fifty pounds, which he owed Trent, and
which he intended to pay him the next morning.

“It is very right, undoubtedly, to pay your debts,” says the old
gentleman; “but sure, on such an occasion, any man but the rankest
usurer would be contented to stay a little while for his money; and it
will be only a little while I am convinced; for, if you deposit this
sum in the great man’s hands, I make no doubt but you will succeed
immediately in getting your commission; and then I will help you to a
method of taking up such a sum as this.” The old gentleman persisted
in this advice, and backed it with every argument he could invent,
declaring, as was indeed true, that he gave the same advice which he
would pursue was the case his own.

Booth long rejected the opinion of his friend, till, as they had not
argued with dry lips, he became heated with wine, and then at last the
old gentleman succeeded. Indeed, such was his love, either for Booth or
for his own opinion, and perhaps for both, that he omitted nothing in
his power. He even endeavoured to palliate the character of Trent, and
unsaid half what he had before said of that gentleman. In the end, he
undertook to make Trent easy, and to go to him the very next morning for
that purpose.

Poor Booth at last yielded, though with the utmost difficulty. Indeed,
had he known quite as much of Trent as the reader doth, no motive
whatsoever would have prevailed on him to have taken the old gentleman’s
advice.



