
_The book begins with polite history._


Before we return to the miserable couple, whom we left at the end of the
last book, we will give our reader the more chearful view of the gay and
happy family of Colonel James.

Mrs. James, when she could not, as we have seen, prevail with Amelia to
accept that invitation which, at the desire of the colonel, she had
so kindly and obediently carried her, returned to her husband and
acquainted him with the ill success of her embassy; at which, to say the
truth, she was almost as much disappointed as the colonel himself; for
he had not taken a much stronger liking to Amelia than she herself had
conceived for Booth. This will account for some passages which may have
a little surprized the reader in the former chapters of this history, as
we were not then at leisure to communicate to them a hint of this kind;
it was, indeed, on Mr. Booth’s account that she had been at the trouble
of changing her dress at the masquerade.

But her passions of this sort, happily for her, were not extremely
strong; she was therefore easily baulked; and, as she met with no
encouragement from Booth, she soon gave way to the impetuosity of Miss
Matthews, and from that time scarce thought more of the affair till her
husband’s design against the wife revived her’s likewise; insomuch
that her passion was at this time certainly strong enough for Booth,
to produce a good hearty hatred for Amelia, whom she now abused to the
colonel in very gross terms, both on the account of her poverty and her
insolence, for so she termed the refusal of all her offers.

The colonel, seeing no hopes of soon possessing his new mistress, began,
like a prudent and wise man, to turn his thoughts towards the securing
his old one. From what his wife had mentioned concerning the behaviour
of the shepherdess, and particularly her preference of Booth, he had
little doubt but that this was the identical Miss Matthews. He resolved
therefore to watch her closely, in hopes of discovering Booth’s intrigue
with her. In this, besides the remainder of affection which he yet
preserved for that lady, he had another view, as it would give him a
fair pretence to quarrel with Booth; who, by carrying on this intrigue,
would have broke his word and honour given to him. And he began now to
hate poor Booth heartily, from the same reason from which Mrs. James had
contracted her aversion to Amelia.

The colonel therefore employed an inferior kind of pimp to watch the
lodgings of Miss Matthews, and to acquaint him if Booth, whose person
was known to the pimp, made any visit there.

The pimp faithfully performed his office, and, having last night made
the wished-for discovery, immediately acquainted his master with it.

Upon this news the colonel presently despatched to Booth the short note
which we have before seen. He sent it to his own house instead of Miss
Matthews’s, with hopes of that very accident which actually did happen.
Not that he had any ingredient of the bully in him, and desired to be
prevented from fighting, but with a prospect of injuring Booth in the
affection and esteem of Amelia, and of recommending himself somewhat
to her by appearing in the light of her champion; for which purpose he
added that compliment to Amelia in his letter. He concluded upon the
whole that, if Booth himself opened the letter, he would certainly meet
him the next morning; but if his wife should open it before he came
home it might have the effects before mentioned; and, for his future
expostulation with Booth, it would not be in Amelia’s power to prevent
it.

Now it happened that this pimp had more masters than one. Amongst these
was the worthy Mr. Trent, for whom he had often done business of the
pimping vocation. He had been employed indeed in the service of the
great peer himself, under the direction of the said Trent, and was the
very person who had assisted the said Trent in dogging Booth and his
wife to the opera-house on the masquerade night.

This subaltern pimp was with his superior Trent yesterday morning, when
he found a bailiff with him in order to receive his instructions for
the arresting Booth, when the bailiff said it would be a very difficult
matter to take him, for that to his knowledge he was as shy a cock as
any in England. The subaltern immediately acquainted Trent with the
business in which he was employed by the colonel; upon which Trent
enjoined him the moment he had set him to give immediate notice to the
bailiff, which he agreed to, and performed accordingly.

The bailiff, on receiving the notice, immediately set out for his stand
at an alehouse within three doors of Miss Matthews’s lodgings; at which,
unfortunately for poor Booth, he arrived a very few minutes before Booth
left that lady in order to return to Amelia.

These were several matters of which we thought necessary our reader
should be informed; for, besides that it conduces greatly to a perfect
understanding of all history, there is no exercise of the mind of a
sensible reader more pleasant than the tracing the several small and
almost imperceptible links in every chain of events by which all the
great actions of the world are produced. We will now in the next chapter
proceed with our history.



