
_In which the history draws towards a conclusion._


Nothing could exceed the astonishment of Booth at the behaviour of the
doctor at the time when he sallied forth in pursuit of the attorney; for
which it was so impossible for him to account in any manner whatever.
He remained a long time in the utmost torture of mind, till at last the
bailif’s wife came to him, and asked him if the doctor was not a madman?
and, in truth, he could hardly defend him from that imputation.

While he was in this perplexity the maid of the house brought him a
message from Robinson, desiring the favour of seeing him above-stairs.
With this he immediately complied.

When these two were alone together, and the key turned on them (for
the bailiff’s wife was a most careful person, and never omitted that
ceremony in the absence of her husband, having always at her tongue’s
end that excellent proverb of “Safe bind, safe find”), Robinson, looking
stedfastly upon Booth, said, “I believe, sir, you scarce remember me.”

Booth answered that he thought he had seen his face somewhere before,
but could not then recollect when or where.

“Indeed, sir,” answered the man, “it was a place which no man can
remember with pleasure. But do you not remember, a few weeks ago, that
you had the misfortune to be in a certain prison in this town, where you
lost a trifling sum at cards to a fellow-prisoner?”

This hint sufficiently awakened Booth’s memory, and he now recollected
the features of his old friend Robinson. He answered him a little
surlily, “I know you now very well, but I did not imagine you would ever
have reminded me of that transaction.”

“Alas, sir!” answered Robinson, “whatever happened then was very
trifling compared to the injuries I have done you; but if my life be
spared long enough I will now undo it all: and, as I have been one of
your worst enemies, I will now be one of your best friends.”

He was just entering upon his story when a noise was heard below which
might be almost compared to what have been heard in Holland when the
dykes have given way, and the ocean in an inundation breaks in upon the
land. It seemed, indeed, as if the whole world was bursting into the
house at once.

Booth was a man of great firmness of mind, and he had need of it all
at this instant. As for poor Robinson, the usual concomitants of guilt
attended him, and he began to tremble in a violent manner.

The first person who ascended the stairs was the doctor, who no sooner
saw Booth than he ran to him and embraced him, crying, “My child, I
wish you joy with all my heart. Your sufferings are all at an end, and
Providence hath done you the justice at last which it will, one day or
other, render to all men. You will hear all presently; but I can now
only tell you that your sister is discovered and the estate is your
own.”

Booth was in such confusion that he scarce made any answer, and now
appeared the justice and his clerk, and immediately afterwards the
constable with his prisoner, the bailiff, and as many more as could
possibly crowd up-stairs.

The doctor now addressed himself to the sick man, and desired him
to repeat the same information before the justice which he had made
already; to which Robinson readily consented.

While the clerk was taking down the information, the attorney expressed
a very impatient desire to send instantly for his clerk, and expressed
so much uneasiness at the confusion in which he had left his papers at
home, that a thought suggested itself to the doctor that, if his house
was searched, some lights and evidence relating to this affair would
certainly be found; he therefore desired the justice to grant a
search-warrant immediately to search his house.

The justice answered that he had no such power; that, if there was any
suspicion of stolen goods, he could grant a warrant to search for them.

“How, sir!” said the doctor, “can you grant a warrant to search a man’s
house for a silver tea-spoon, and not in a case like this, where a man
is robbed of his whole estate?”

“Hold, sir,” says the sick man; “I believe I can answer that point;
for I can swear he hath several title-deeds of the estate now in his
possession, which I am sure were stolen from the right owner.”

The justice still hesitated. He said title-deeds savoured of the Realty,
and it was not felony to steal them. If, indeed, they were taken away in
a box, then it would be felony to steal the box.

“Savour of the Realty! Savour of the f--talty,” said the doctor. “I
never heard such incomprehensible nonsense. This is impudent, as well as
childish trifling with the lives and properties of men.”

“Well, sir,” said Robinson, “I now am sure I can do his business; for
I know he hath a silver cup in his possession which is the property of
this gentleman (meaning Booth), and how he got it but by stealth let him
account if he can.”

“That will do,” cries the justice with great pleasure. “That will do;
and if you will charge him on oath with that, I will instantly grant
my warrant to search his house for it.” “And I will go and see it
executed,” cries the doctor; for it was a maxim of his, that no man
could descend below himself in doing any act which may contribute to
protect an innocent person, or to bring a rogue to the gallows.

The oath was instantly taken, the warrant signed, and the doctor
attended the constable in the execution of it.

The clerk then proceeded in taking the information of Robinson, and had
just finished it, when the doctor returned with the utmost joy in his
countenance, and declared that he had sufficient evidence of the fact in
his possession. He had, indeed, two or three letters from Miss Harris
in answer to the attorney’s frequent demands of money for secrecy, that
fully explained the whole villany.

The justice now asked the prisoner what he had to say for himself, or
whether he chose to say anything in his own defence.

“Sir,” said the attorney, with great confidence, “I am not to defend
myself here. It will be of no service to me; for I know you neither can
nor will discharge me. But I am extremely innocent of all this matter,
as I doubt not but to make appear to the satisfaction of a court of
justice.”

The legal previous ceremonies were then gone through of binding over the
prosecutor, &c., and then the attorney was committed to Newgate, whither
he was escorted amidst the acclamations of the populace.

When Murphy was departed, and a little calm restored in the house, the
justice made his compliments of congratulation to Booth, who, as well as
he could in his present tumult of joy, returned his thanks to both the
magistrate and the doctor. They were now all preparing to depart, when
Mr. Bondum stept up to Booth, and said, “Hold, sir, you have forgot one
thing--you have not given bail yet.”

This occasioned some distress at this time, for the attorney’s friend
was departed; but when the justice heard this, he immediately offered
himself as the other bondsman, and thus ended the affair.

It was now past six o’clock, and none of the gentlemen had yet dined.
They very readily, therefore, accepted the magistrate’s invitation, and
went all together to his house.

And now the very first thing that was done, even before they sat down to
dinner, was to dispatch a messenger to one of the best surgeons in town
to take care of Robinson, and another messenger to Booth’s lodgings to
prevent Amelia’s concern at their staying so long.

The latter, however, was to little purpose; for Amelia’s patience had
been worn out before, and she had taken a hackney-coach and driven to
the bailiff’s, where she arrived a little after the departure of her
husband, and was thence directed to the justice’s.

Though there was no kind of reason for Amelia’s fright at hearing that
her husband and Doctor Harrison were gone before the justice, and though
she indeed imagined that they were there in the light of complainants,
not of offenders, yet so tender were her fears for her husband, and
so much had her gentle spirits been lately agitated, that she had
a thousand apprehensions of she knew not what. When she arrived,
therefore, at the house, she ran directly into the room where all the
company were at dinner, scarce knowing what she did or whither she was
going.

She found her husband in such a situation, and discovered such
chearfulness in his countenance, that so violent a turn was given to her
spirits that she was just able, with the assistance of a glass of water,
to support herself. She soon, however, recovered her calmness, and in
a little time began to eat what might indeed be almost called her
breakfast.

The justice now wished her joy of what had happened that day, for
which she kindly thanked him, apprehending he meant the liberty of her
husband. His worship might perhaps have explained himself more largely
had not the doctor given him a timely wink; for this wise and good man
was fearful of making such a discovery all at once to Amelia, lest it
should overpower her, and luckily the justice’s wife was not well enough
acquainted with the matter to say anything more on it than barely to
assure the lady that she joined in her husband’s congratulation.

Amelia was then in a clean white gown, which she had that day redeemed,
and was, indeed, dressed all over with great neatness and exactness;
with the glow therefore which arose in her features from finding her
husband released from his captivity, she made so charming a figure, that
she attracted the eyes of the magistrate and of his wife, and they
both agreed when they were alone that they had never seen so charming
a creature; nay, Booth himself afterwards told her that he scarce ever
remembered her to look so extremely beautiful as she did that evening.

Whether Amelia’s beauty, or the reflexion on the remarkable act of
justice he had performed, or whatever motive filled the magistrate with
extraordinary good humour, and opened his heart and cellars, I will not
determine; but he gave them so hearty a welcome, and they were all so
pleased with each other, that Amelia, for that one night, trusted the
care of her children to the woman where they lodged, nor did the company
rise from table till the clock struck eleven.

They then separated. Amelia and Booth, having been set down at their
lodgings, retired into each other’s arms; nor did Booth that evening, by
the doctor’s advice, mention one word of the grand affair to his wife.



