
_In which the history is concluded._


Having brought our history to a conclusion, as to those points in which
we presume our reader was chiefly interested, in the foregoing chapter,
we shall in this, by way of epilogue, endeavour to satisfy his curiosity
as to what hath since happened to the principal personages of whom we
have treated in the foregoing pages.

Colonel James and his lady, after living in a polite manner for many
years together, at last agreed to live in as polite a manner asunder.
The colonel hath kept Miss Matthews ever since, and is at length
grown to doat on her (though now very disagreeable in her person, and
immensely fat) to such a degree, that he submits to be treated by her in
the most tyrannical manner.

He allows his lady eight hundred pound a-year, with which she divides
her time between Tunbridge, Bath, and London, and passes about nine
hours in the twenty-four at cards. Her income is lately increased by
three thousand pound left her by her brother Colonel Bath, who was
killed in a duel about six years ago by a gentleman who told the colonel
he differed from him in opinion.

The noble peer and Mrs. Ellison have been both dead several years, and
both of the consequences of their favourite vices; Mrs. Ellison having
fallen a martyr to her liquor, and the other to his amours, by which he
was at last become so rotten that he stunk above-ground.

The attorney, Murphy, was brought to his trial at the Old Bailey,
where, after much quibbling about the meaning of a very plain act
of parliament, he was at length convicted of forgery, and was soon
afterwards hanged at Tyburn.

The witness for some time seemed to reform his life, and received a
small pension from Booth; after which he returned to vicious courses,
took a purse on the highway, was detected and taken, and followed the
last steps of his old master. So apt are men whose manners have been
once thoroughly corrupted, to return, from any dawn of an amendment,
into the dark paths of vice.

As to Miss Harris, she lived three years with a broken heart at
Boulogne, where she received annually fifty pound from her sister, who
was hardly prevailed on by Dr Harrison not to send her a hundred, and
then died in a most miserable manner.

Mr. Atkinson upon the whole hath led a very happy life with his wife,
though he hath been sometimes obliged to pay proper homage to her
superior understanding and knowledge. This, however, he chearfully
submits to, and she makes him proper returns of fondness. They have two
fine boys, of whom they are equally fond. He is lately advanced to the
rank of captain, and last summer both he and his wife paid a visit of
three months to Booth and his wife.

Dr Harrison is grown old in years and in honour, beloved and respected
by all his parishioners and by all his neighbours. He divides his time
between his parish, his old town, and Booth’s--at which last place he
had, two years ago, a gentle fit of the gout, being the first attack of
that distemper. During this fit Amelia was his nurse, and her two oldest
daughters sat up alternately with him for a whole week. The eldest of
those girls, whose name is Amelia, is his favourite; she is the picture
of her mother, and it is thought the doctor hath distinguished her in
his will, for he hath declared that he will leave his whole fortune,
except some few charities, among Amelia’s children.

As to Booth and Amelia, Fortune seems to have made them large amends
for the tricks she played them in their youth. They have, ever since the
above period of this history, enjoyed an uninterrupted course of health
and happiness. In about six weeks after Booth’s first coming into the
country he went to London and paid all his debts of honour; after which,
and a stay of two days only, he returned into the country, and hath
never since been thirty miles from home. He hath two boys and four
girls; the eldest of the boys, he who hath made his appearance in this
history, is just come from the university, and is one of the finest
gentlemen and best scholars of his age. The second is just going from
school, and is intended for the church, that being his own choice. His
eldest daughter is a woman grown, but we must not mention her age. A
marriage was proposed to her the other day with a young fellow of a
good estate, but she never would see him more than once: “For Doctor
Harrison,” says she, “told me he was illiterate, and I am sure he is
ill-natured.” The second girl is three years younger than her sister,
and the others are yet children.

Amelia is still the finest woman in England of her age. Booth himself
often avers she is as handsome as ever. Nothing can equal the serenity
of their lives. Amelia declared to me the other day, that she did not
remember to have seen her husband out of humour these ten years; and,
upon my insinuating to her that he had the best of wives, she answered
with a smile that she ought to be so, for that he had made her the
happiest of women.


THE END.









