

In a remote part of the county of Pembroke, is an old building, formerly
of great strength, and inhabited for centuries by the ancient family of
Mowbray; to the sole remaining branch of which it still belonged, tho'
it was, at the time this history commences, inhabited only by servants;
and the greater part of it was gone to decay. A few rooms only had been
occasionally repaired to accommodate the proprietor, when he found it
necessary to come thither to receive his rents, or to inspect the
condition of the estate; which however happened so seldom, that during
the twelve years he had been master of it, he had only once visited the
castle for a few days. The business that related to the property round
it (which was very considerable) was conducted by a steward grown grey
in the service of the family, and by an attorney from London, who came
to hold the courts. And an old housekeeper, a servant who waited on her,
the steward, and a labourer who was kept to look after his horse and
work in that part of the garden which yet bore the vestige of
cultivation, were now all its inhabitants; except a little girl, of whom
the housekeeper had the care, and who was believed to be the natural
daughter of that elder brother, by whose death Lord Montreville, the
present possessor, became entitled to the estate.

This nobleman, while yet a younger son, was (by the partiality of his
mother, who had been an heiress, and that of some other female
relations) master of a property nearly equal to what he inherited by the
death of his brother, Mr. Mowbray.

He had been originally designed for the law; but in consequence of being
entitled to the large estate which had been his mother's, and heir, by
will, to all her opulent family, he had quitted that profession, and at
the age of about four and twenty, had married Lady Eleonore Delamere, by
whom he had a son and two daughters.

The illustrious family from which Lady Eleonore descended, became
extinct in the male line by the premature death of her two brothers; and
her Ladyship becoming sole heiress, her husband took the name of
Delamere; and obtaining one of the titles of the lady's father, was, at
his death, created Viscount Montreville. Mr. Mowbray died before he was
thirty, in Italy; and Lord Montreville, on taking possession of Mowbray
Castle, found there his infant daughter.

Her mother had died soon after her birth; and she had been sent from
France, where she was born, and put under the care of Mrs. Carey, the
housekeeper, who was tenderly attached to her, having been the attendant
of Mr. Mowbray from his earliest infancy.

Lord Montreville suffered her to remain in the situation in which he
found her, and to go by the name of Mowbray: he allowed for the trifling
charge of her board and necessary cloaths in the steward's account, the
examination of which was for some years the only circumstance that
reminded him of the existence of the unfortunate orphan.

With no other notice from her father's family, Emmeline had attained her
twelfth year; an age at which she would have been left in the most
profound ignorance, if her uncommon understanding, and unwearied
application, had not supplied the deficiency of her instructors, and
conquered the disadvantages of her situation.

Mrs. Carey could indeed read with tolerable fluency, and write an hand
hardly legible: and Mr. Williamson, the old steward, had been formerly a
good penman, and was still a proficient in accounts. Both were anxious
to give their little charge all the instruction they could: but without
the quickness and attention she shewed to whatever they attempted to
teach, such preceptors could have done little.

Emmeline had a kind of intuitive knowledge; and comprehended every thing
with a facility that soon left her instructors behind her. The
precarious and neglected situation in which she lived, troubled not the
innocent Emmeline. Having never experienced any other, she felt no
uneasiness at her present lot; and on the future she was not yet old
enough to reflect.

Mrs. Carey was to her in place of the mother she had never known; and
the old steward, she was accustomed to call father. The death of this
venerable servant was the first sorrow Emmeline ever felt: returning
late one evening, in the winter, from a neighbouring town, he attempted
to cross a ford, where the waters being extremely out, he was carried
down by the rapidity of the current. His horse was drowned; and tho' he
was himself rescued from the flood by some peasants who knew him, and
carried to the castle, he was so much bruised, and had suffered so much
from cold, that he was taken up speechless, and continued so for the few
hours he survived the accident.

Mrs. Carey, who had lived in the same house with him near forty years,
felt the sincerest concern at his death; with which it was necessary for
her immediately to acquaint Lord Montreville.

His Lordship directed his attorney in London to replace him with
another; to whom Mrs. Carey, with an aching heart, delivered the keys of
the steward's room and drawers.

Her health, which was before declining, received a rude shock from the
melancholy death of Mr. Williamson; and she and her little ward had soon
the mortification of seeing he was forgotten by all but themselves.

Frequent and severe attacks of the gout now made daily ravages in the
constitution of Mrs. Carey; and her illness recurred so often, that
Emmeline, now almost fourteen, began to reflect on what she should do,
if Mrs. Carey died: and these reflections occasionally gave her pain.
But she was not yet of an age to consider deeply, or to dwell long on
gloomy subjects. Her mind, however, gradually expanded, and her judgment
improved: for among the deserted rooms of this once noble edifice, was a
library, which had been well furnished with the books of those ages in
which they had been collected. Many of them were in black letter; and so
injured by time, that the most indefatigable antiquary could have made
nothing of them.

From these, Emmeline turned in despair to some others of more modern
appearance; which, tho' they also had suffered from the dampness of the
room, and in some parts were almost effaced with mould, were yet
generally legible. Among them, were Spencer and Milton, two or three
volumes of the Spectator, an old edition of Shakespeare, and an odd
volume or two of Pope.

These, together with some tracts of devotion, which she knew would be
very acceptable to Mrs. Carey, she cleaned by degrees from the dust with
which they were covered, and removed into the housekeeper's room; where
the village carpenter accommodated her with a shelf, on which, with
great pride of heart, she placed her new acquisitions.

The dismantled windows, and broken floor of the library, prevented her
continuing there long together: but she frequently renewed her search,
and with infinite pains examined all the piles of books, some of which
lay tumbled in heaps on the floor, others promiscuously placed on the
shelves, where the swallow, the sparrow, and the daw, had found
habitations for many years: for as the present proprietor had determined
to lay out no more than was absolutely necessary to keep one end of the
castle habitable, the library, which was in the most deserted part of
it, was in a ruinous state, and had long been entirely forsaken.

Emmeline, however, by her unwearied researches, nearly completed several
sets of books, in which instruction and amusement were happily blended.
From them she acquired a taste for poetry, and the more ornamental parts
of literature; as well as the grounds of that elegant and useful
knowledge, which, if it rendered not her life happier, enabled her to
support, with the dignity of conscious worth, those undeserved evils
with which many of her years were embittered.

Mrs. Carey, now far advanced in life, found her infirmities daily
increase. She was often incapable of leaving her chamber for many weeks;
during which Emmeline attended her with the solicitude and affection of
a daughter; scorned not to perform the most humble offices that
contributed to her relief; and sat by her whole days, or watched her
whole nights, with the tenderest and most unwearied assiduity.

On those evenings in summer, when her attendance could for a few hours
be dispensed with, she delighted to wander among the rocks that formed
the bold and magnificent boundary of the ocean, which spread its immense
expanse of water within half a mile of the castle. Simply dressed, and
with no other protection than Providence, she often rambled several
miles into the country, visiting the remote huts of the shepherds, among
the wildest mountains.

During the life of Mrs. Mowbray, a small stipend had been annually
allowed for the use of the poor: this had not yet been withdrawn; and
it now passed thro' the hands of Mrs. Carey, whose enquiries into the
immediate necessities of the cottagers in the neighbourhood of the
castle, devolved to Emmeline, when she was herself unable to make them.

The ignorant rustics, who had seen Emmeline grow up among them from her
earliest infancy, and who now beheld her with the compassion as well as
the beauty of an angel, administering to their necessities and
alleviating their misfortunes, looked upon her as a superior being, and
throughout the country she was almost adored.

Perfectly unconscious of those attractions which now began to charm
every other eye, Emmeline had entered her sixteenth year; and the
progress of her understanding was equal to the improvement of her
person; which, tho' she was not perfectly handsome, could not be beheld
at first without pleasure, and which the more it was seen became more
interesting and engaging.

Her figure was elegant and graceful; somewhat exceeding the middling
height. Her eyes were blue; and her hair brown. Her features not very
regular; yet there was a sweetness in her countenance, when she smiled,
more charming than the effect of the most regular features could have
given. Her countenance, open and ingenuous, expressed every emotion of
her mind: it had assumed rather a pensive cast; and tho' it occasionally
was lighted up by vivacity, had been lately frequently overclouded; when
the sufferings of her only friend called forth all the generous sympathy
of her nature.

And now the first severe misfortune she had known was about to overtake
her. Early in the spring of that year, which was the sixteenth from her
birth, Mrs. Carey had felt an attack of the gout, which however was
short; and her health seemed for some time afterwards more settled than
it had been for many months. She was one evening preparing to go down to
the village, leaning on the arm of Emmeline, when she suddenly
complained of an acute pain in her head, and fell back into a chair. The
affrighted girl called for assistance, and endeavoured by every means in
her power to recover her, but it was impossible; the gout had seized her
head; and casting on Emmeline a look which seemed to express all she
felt at leaving her thus desolate and friendless, her venerable friend,
after a short struggle, breathed her last.

What should Emmeline now do? In this distress (the first she had ever
known) how should she act? She saw, in the lifeless corpse before her,
the person on whom she had, from her first recollection, been accustomed
to rely; who had provided for all her wants, and prevented every care
for herself. And now she was left to perform for this dear friend the
last sad offices, and knew not what would hereafter be her own lot.

In strong and excellent understandings there is, in every period of
life, a force which distress enables them to exert, and which prevents
their sinking under the pressure of those evils which overwhelm and
subdue minds more feeble and unequal.

The spirits of Emmeline were yet unbroken by affliction, and her
understanding was of the first rank. She possessed this native firmness
in a degree very unusual to her age and sex. Instead therefore of giving
way to tears and exclamations, she considered how she should best
perform all she now could do for her deceased friend; and having seen
every proper care taken of her remains, and given orders for every thing
relative to them, with the solemn serenity of settled sorrow, she
retired to her room, where she began to reflect on her irreparable loss,
and the melancholy situation in which she was left; which she never had
courage to consider closely till it was actually before her.

Painful indeed were the thoughts that now crouded on her mind;
encreasing the anguish of her spirit for her recent misfortune. She
considered herself as a being belonging to nobody; as having no right to
claim the protection of any one; no power to procure for herself the
necessaries of life. On the steward Maloney she had long looked with
disgust, from the assured and forward manner in which he thought proper
to treat her. The freedom of his behaviour, which she could with
difficulty repress while Mrs. Carey lived, might now, she feared,
approach to more insulting familiarity; to be exposed to which, entirely
in his power, and without any female companion, filled her with the most
alarming apprehensions: and the more her mind dwelt on that circumstance
the more she was terrified at the prospect before her; insomuch, that
she would immediately have quitted the house--But whither could she go?

By abruptly leaving the asylum Lord Montreville had hitherto allowed
her, she feared she might forfeit all claim to his future protection:
and, unknown as she was to the principal inhabitants of the country, who
were few, and their houses at a great distance, she could hardly hope to
be received by any of them.

She had therefore no choice left but to remain at the castle till she
heard from Lord Montreville: and she determined to acquaint his Lordship
of the death of Mrs. Carey, and desire to receive his commands as to
herself.

Fatigued and oppressed, she retired to bed, but not to sleep. The image
of her expiring protectress was still before her eyes; and if exhausted
nature forced her to give way to a momentary forgetfulness, she soon
started from her imperfect slumber, and fancied she heard the voice of
Mrs. Carey, calling on her for help; and her last groan still vibrated
in her ears!--while the stillness of the night, interrupted only by the
cries of the owls which haunted the ruins, added to the gloomy and
mournful sensations of her mind.

At length however the sun arose--the surrounding objects lost the horror
that darkness and silence had lent them--and Emmeline fell into a short
but refreshing repose.



