

As soon as Emmeline arose the next morning, she addressed the following
letter to Lord Montreville.


  'My Lord,

    'In the utmost affliction, I address myself to your
  Lordship, to acquaint you with the death of Mrs. Carey, after an
  illness of a very few moments: by which unhappy event I have lost a
  friend who has indeed been a mother to me; and am now left at the
  castle, ignorant of your Lordship's pleasure as to my future
  residence.

    'You will, my Lord, I doubt not, recollect that it is, at my time
  of life, improper for me to reside here with Mr. Maloney; and if it
  be your Lordship's intention for me to continue here, I hope you
  will have the goodness to send down some proper person to fill the
  place of the worthy woman I have lost.

    'On your Lordship's humanity and consideration I depend for an
  early answer: in which hope I have the honor to remain,

                                                   your Lordship's
                                    dutiful and most humble servant,
                                                    EMMELINE MOWBRAY.'

  _Mowbray Castle,_
    _21st May._


The same post carried a letter from Mr. Maloney, informing Lord
Montreville of the housekeeper's death, and desiring directions about
_Miss_, as he elegantly termed Emmeline.

To these letters no answers were returned for upwards of a fortnight:
during which melancholy interval, Emmeline followed to the grave the
remains of the friend of her infancy, and took a last farewel of the
only person who seemed interested for her welfare. Then returning with
streaming eyes to her own room, she threw herself on the bed, and gave
way to a torrent of tears; for her spirits were overcome by the mournful
scene to which she had just been a witness, and by the heavy forebodings
of future sorrow which oppressed her heart.

The troublesome civilities of the steward Maloney, she soon found the
difficulty of evading. Fearful of offending him from whom she could not
escape; yet unable to keep up an intercourse of civility with a man who
would interpret it into an encouragement of his presumptuous attentions,
she was compelled to make use of an artifice; and to plead ill health as
an excuse for not dining as usual in the steward's room: and indeed her
uneasiness and grief were such as hardly made it a pretence.

After many days of anxious expectation, the following letter arrived
from the house-steward of Lord Montreville; as on such an occasion his
Lordship did not think it necessary to write himself.


                                   _Berkeley-Square_, _June_ 17, 17--

  'Miss,
    'My Lord orders me to acquaint you, that in consequence of your's
  of the 21st ult. informing his Lordship of the old housekeeper's,
  Mrs. Carey's, decease, he has directed Mrs. Grant, his Lordship's
  town housekeeper, to look out for another; and Mrs. Grant has agreed
  with a gentlewoman accordingly, who will be down at the castle
  forthwith. My Lord is gone to Essex; but has directed me to let Mr.
  Maloney know, that he is to furnish you with all things needful same
  as before. By my Lord's command, from, Miss,

                                           your very humble servant,
                                                       RICHARD MADDOX.'


While Emmeline waited the expected arrival of the person to whose care
she was now to be consigned, the sister of Mrs. Carey, who was the only
relation she had, sent a nephew of her husband's to take possession of
what effects had belonged to her; in doing which, a will was found, in
which she bequeathed fifty pounds as a testimony of her tender affection
to 'Miss Emmeline Mowbray, the daughter of her late dear master;'
together with all the contents of a small chest of drawers, which stood
in her room.

The rest of her property, which consisted of her cloaths and about two
hundred pounds, which she had saved in service, became her sister's, and
were delivered by Maloney to the young man commissioned to receive them.

In the drawers given to her, Emmeline found some fine linen and laces,
which had belonged to her mother; and two little silk boxes covered with
nuns embroidery, which seemed not to have been opened for many years.

Emmeline saw that they were filled with letters: some of them in a hand
which she had been shewn as her father's. But she left them uninspected,
and fastened up the caskets; her mind being yet too much affected with
her loss to be able to examine any thing which brought to her
recollection the fond solicitude of her departed friend.

The cold and mechanical terms in which the steward's letter was written,
encreased all her uneasy fears as to her future prospects.

Lord Montreville seemed to feel no kindness for her; nor to give any
consideration to her forlorn and comfortless situation. The officious
freedoms of Maloney encreased so much, that she was obliged to confine
herself almost entirely to her own room to avoid him; and she
determined, that if after the arrival of the companion she expected, he
continued to besiege her with so much impertinent familiarity, she would
quit the house, tho' compelled to accept the meanest service for a
subsistence.

After a fortnight of expectation, notice was received at the castle,
that Mrs. Garnet, the housekeeper, was arrived at the market town. The
labourer, with an horse, was dispatched for her, and towards evening she
made her entry.

To Emmeline, who had from her earliest remembrance been accustomed only
to the plainest dress, and the most simple and sober manners, the figure
and deportment of this woman appeared equally extraordinary.

She wore a travelling dress of tawdry-coloured silk, trimmed with bright
green ribbands; and her head was covered with an immense black silk hat,
from which depended many yellow streamers; while the plumage, with
which it was plentifully adorned, hung dripping over her face, from the
effects of a thunder shower thro' which she had passed. Her hair, tho'
carefully curled and powdered on her leaving London, had been also
greatly deranged in her journey, and descended, in knotty tufts of a
dirty yellow, over her cheeks and forehead; adding to the vulgar
ferocity of a harsh countenance and a coarse complexion. Her figure was
uncommonly tall and boney; and her voice so discordant and shrill, as to
pierce the ear with the most unpleasant sensation, and compleat the
disagreeable idea her person impressed.

Emmeline saw her enter, handed by the officious Maloney; and repressing
her astonishment, she arose, and attempted to speak to her: but the
contrast between the dirty, tawdry, and disgusting figure before her,
and the sober plainness and neat simplicity of her lost friend, struck
so forcibly on her imagination, that she burst into tears, and was
altogether unable to command her emotion.

The steward having with great gallantry handed in the newly arrived
lady, she thus began:

'Oh! Lord a marcy on me!--to be shore I be got here at last! But indeed
if I had a known whereabout I was a coming to, 'tis not a double the
wagers as should a hired me. Lord! why what a ramshakel ould place it
is!--and then such a monstrous long way from London! I suppose, Sir,'
(to Maloney) 'as you be the steward; and you Miss, I reckon, be the
young Miss as I be to have the care on. Why to be sure I did'nt much
expect to see a christian face in such an out of the way place. I don't
b'leve I shall stay; howsomdever do let me have some tea; and do you,
Miss, shew me whereabout I be to sleep.'

Emmeline, struggling with her dislike, or at least desirous of
concealing it, did not venture to trust her voice with an answer; for
her heart was too full; but stepping to the door, she called to the
female servant, and ordered her to shew the lady her room. She had
herself been used to share that appropriated to Mrs. Carey; but she now
resolved to remove her bed into an apartment in one of the turrets of
the castle, which was the only unoccupied room not wholly exposed to the
weather.

This little room had been sashed by Mrs. Mowbray on account of the
beautiful prospect it commanded between the hills, where suddenly
sinking to the South West, they made way through a long narrow valley,
fringed with copses, for a small but rapid river; which hurrying among
immense stones, and pieces of rock that seemed to have been torn from
the mountains by its violence, rushed into the sea at the distance of a
mile from the castle.

This room, now for many years neglected, was much out of repair, but
still habitable; and tho' it was at a great distance from the rooms yet
occupied, Emmeline chose rather to take up her abode in it, than partake
of the apartment which was now to belong to Mrs. Garnet: and she found
reason to applaud herself for this determination when she heard the
exclamation Mrs. Garnet made on entering it--

'Lord! why 'tis but a shabbyish place; and here is two beds I see. But
that won't suit me I asshore you. I chuses to have a room to myself, if
it be ever so.'

'Be not in any pain on that account, Madam,' said Emmeline, who had now
collected her thoughts; 'it is my intention to remove my bed, and I have
directed a person to do it immediately.'

She then returned into the steward's room, where Maloney thus addressed
her--

'Sarvent again, pretty Miss! Pray how d'ye like our new housekeeper? A
smartish piece of goods upon my word for Pembrokeshire; quite a London
lady, eh, Miss?'

'It is impossible for me, Sir, to judge of her yet.'

'Why ay, Miss, as you justly observes, 'tis full early to know what
people be; but I hope we shall find her quite the thing; and if so be as
she's but good tempered, and agreeable, and the like, why I warrant we
shall pass this here summer as pleasant as any thing can be. And now my
dear Miss, perhaps, may'nt be so shy and distant, as she have got
another woman body to keep her company.'

This eloquent harangue was interrupted by the return of Mrs. Garnet,
full of anxiety for her tea; and in the bustle created by the desire of
the maid and Maloney to accommodate her, Emmeline retired to her new
apartment, where she was obliged to attend to the removal of her bed and
other things; and excusing herself, under the pretence of fatigue, from
returning to the steward's room, she passed some time in melancholy
recollection and more melancholy anticipation, and then retired to rest.

Some days passed in murmurs on the part of Mrs. Garnet, and in silence
on that of Emmeline; who, as soon as she had finished her short repasts,
always went to her own room.

After a few weeks, she discovered that the lady grew every day more
reconciled to her situation; and from the pleasures she apparently took
in the gallantries of Maloney, and his constant assiduities to her, the
innocent Emmeline supposed there was really an attachment forming
between them, which would certainly deliver her from the displeasing
attentions of the steward.

Occupied almost entirely by her books, of which she every day became
more enamoured, she never willingly broke in upon a tete a tete which
she fancied was equally agreeable to all parties; and she saw with
satisfaction that they regretted not her absence.

But the motives of Maloney's attention were misunderstood. Insensible as
such a man must be supposed to the charms of the elegant and
self-cultivated mind of Emmeline, her personal beauty had made a deep
impression on his heart; and he had formed a design of marrying her,
before the death of Mrs. Carey, to whom he had once or twice mentioned
something like a hint of his wishes: but she had received all his
discourse on that topic with so much coldness, and ever so carefully
avoided any conversation that might again lead to it, that he had been
deterred from entirely explaining himself. Now, however, he thought the
time was arrived, when he might make a more successful application; for
he never doubted but that Mrs. Garnet would obtain, over the tender and
ingenuous mind of Emmeline, an influence as great as had been possessed
by Mrs. Carey.

Nor did he apprehend that a friendless orphan, without fortune or
connections, would want much persuasion to marry a young man of handsome
figure (as he conceived himself to be,) who was established in a
profitable place, and had some dependance of his own.

The distance which Emmeline had always obliged him to observe, he
imputed to the timidity of her nature; which he hoped would be lessened
by the free and familiar manners of her present companion, whose
conversation was very unlike what she had before been accustomed to hear
from Mrs. Carey.

Impressed with these ideas, he paid his court most assiduously to the
housekeeper, who put down all his compliments to the account of her own
attractions; and was extremely pleased with her conquest; which she
exhausted all her eloquence and all her wardrobe to secure.



