

The sun no sooner appeared above the horizon, than her conductor was
ready with his one-horse chair: and Emmeline being seated in it, and her
little baggage adjusted, she left the door of the castle; where Maloney,
who saw his favourite hopes vanish as he feared for ever, stood with a
rueful countenance to behold her departure.

However desirous she was of quitting a residence which had long been
uneasy to her, and which was now become so extremely improper, such is
the force of early habit, that she could not bid it adieu without being
greatly affected.

There she had passed her earliest infancy, and had known, in that period
of unconscious happiness, many delightful hours which would return no
more.

It was endeared to her by the memory of that good friend who had
supplied to her the place of a parent; from whom alone she had ever
heard the soothing voice of maternal solicitude. And as she passed by
the village church, which had been formerly the chapel of the monastery,
and joined the castle walls, she turned her eyes, filled with tears,
towards the spot where the remains of Mrs. Carey were deposited, and
sighed deeply; a thousand tender and painful recollections crouding on
her heart.

As she left the village, several women and children, who had heard she
was going that day, were already waiting to bid her farewell;
considering her as the last of that family, by whom they had been
employed when in health, and relieved when in sickness; they lamented
her departure as their greatest misfortune.

The present possessor of the castle bore not the name of Mowbray, and
was not at all interested for the peasantry, among whom he was a
stranger; they therefore, in losing Emmeline, seemed to lose the last of
the race of their ancient benefactors.

Emmeline, affected by their simple expressions of regret, returned their
good wishes with tears; and as soon as the chaise drove out of the
village, again fixed her eyes on the habitation she had quitted.

Its venerable towers rising above the wood in which it was almost
embosomed, made one of the most magnificent features of a landscape,
which now appeared in sight.

The road lay along the side of what would in England be called a
mountain; at its feet rolled the rapid stream that washed the castle
walls, foaming over fragments of rock; and bounded by a wood of oak and
pine; among which the ruins of the monastery, once an appendage to the
castle, reared its broken arches; and marked by grey and mouldering
walls, and mounds covered with slight vegetation, it was traced to its
connection with the castle itself, still frowning in gothic
magnificence; and stretching over several acres of ground: the citadel,
which was totally in ruins and covered with ivy, crowning the whole.
Farther to the West, beyond a bold and rocky shore, appeared the sea;
and to the East, a chain of mountains which seemed to meet the clouds;
while on the other side, a rich and beautiful vale, now variegated with
the mellowed tints of the declining year, spread its enclosures, 'till
it was lost again among the blue and barren hills.

Headly declaimed eloquently on the charms of the prospect, which
gradually unveiled itself as the autumnal mist disappeared. But
Emmeline, tho' ever alive to the beauties of nature, was too much
occupied by her own melancholy reflections to attend to the
animadversions of her companion.

_She_ saw nothing but the castle, of which she believed she was now
taking an eternal adieu; and her looks were fixed on it, 'till the road
winding down the hill on the other side, concealed it from her sight.

Headly imputed her sadness to a very different cause than that of an
early and long attachment to a particular spot. He supposed that regret
at being obliged to leave Delamere, to whose passion he could not
believe her insensible, occasioned the melancholy that overwhelmed her.
He spoke to her of him, and affected to lament the uneasiness which so
violent and ungovernable a temper in an only son, might occasion to his
family. He then talked of the two young ladies, his sisters, whom he
described as the finest young women in the country, and as highly
accomplished. Emmeline sighed at the comparison between _their_
situation and her own.

After some hours travelling through roads which made it very fatigueing,
they arrived at a little obscure house of entertainment, and after some
refreshment, continued their journey unmolested.

Delamere arose early, and calling for Millefleur, enquired at what hour
Miss Mowbray was to go. On hearing that she had left the castle more
than an hour, his rage and vexation broke through all the respect he
owed his father; who being acquainted by his valet of his resolution
immediately to follow the chaise, entered the room. He remonstrated with
him at first with great warmth; but Delamere, irritated by
contradiction, obstinately adhered to his resolution of immediately
pursuing the travellers.

Lord Montreville, finding that opposition rather encreased than remedied
the violence of his son's passionate sallies, determined to try what
persuasion would do; and Delamere, whose temper was insensible to the
threats of anger, yielded to remonstrance when softened by paternal
affection; and consented to forego his intention if Lord Montreville
would tell him where Emmeline was gone.

His Lordship, who probably thought this one of those instances in which
falsehood is excuseable if not meritorious, told him, with affected
reluctance, that she was gone to board at Bridgenorth, with Mrs.
Watkins, the sister of old Carey.

As this account was extremely probable, Delamere readily believed it;
and having with some difficulty been prevailed upon to pass his word
that he would not immediately take any steps to see her, tranquillity
was for the present restored to the castle.

Emmeline in the mean time, after a long and weary journey, arrived at
Swansea. Mrs. Watkins, who expected her, received her in a little but
very neat habitation, which consisted of a small room by way of
parlour, not unlike the cabin of a packet boat, and a bed-chamber over
it of the same dimensions. Of these apartments, Emmeline took
possession. Her conductor took leave of her; and she now wished to be
able to form some opinion of her new hostess; whose countenance, which
extremely resembled that of Mrs. Carey, had immediately prejudiced her
in her favour.

Being assured by Lord Montreville of every liberal payment for the board
and lodging of Miss Mowbray, she received her with a degree of civility
almost oppressive: but Emmeline, who soon found that she possessed none
of that warmth of heart and lively interest in the happiness of others
which so much endeared to her the memory of her former friend, was very
glad when after a few days the good woman returned with her usual
avidity to the regulation of her domestic matters, and suffered Emmeline
to enjoy that solitude which she knew so well how to employ.

Delamere, still lingering at the castle, where he seemed to stay for no
other reason than because he had there seen Emmeline, was pensive,
restless, and absent; and Lord Montreville saw with great alarm that
this impression was less likely to be effaced by time and absence than
he had supposed.

Fitz-Edward, obliged to go to Ireland to his regiment for some time, had
taken leave of them; and the impatience of Lord Montreville to return to
town was encreased by repeated letters from his wife.

Delamere however still evaded it; hoping that his father would set out
without him, and that he should by that means have an opportunity of
going to Bridgenorth, where he determined to solicit Emmeline to consent
to a Scottish expedition, and persuaded himself he should not meet a
refusal.

At length Lady Montreville, yet more alarmed at the delay, directed her
eldest daughter to write to his Lordship, and to give such an account of
her health as should immediately oblige the father and son to return.

Delamere, after such a letter, could not refuse to depart; and
comforting himself that he might be able soon to escape from the
observation of his family, and put his project in execution, he
consented to begin his journey. He determined, however, to write to Miss
Mowbray, and to desire her to direct her answer under cover to a friend
in London.

He did so; and addressed it to her at Mrs. Watkins's, at Bridgenorth:
but soon after his arrival in town, the letter was returned to the place
from which it was dated; having been opened at the office in consequence
of no such person as Miss Mowbray or Mrs. Watkins being to be found
there.

Delamere saw he had been deceived; but to complain was fruitless: he had
therefore no hope of discovering where Emmeline was, but by lying in
wait for some accidental intelligence.

The family usually passed the Christmas recess at their seat in Norfolk;
whither Delamere, who at first tried to avoid being of the party, at
length agreed to accompany them, on condition of his being allowed to
perform an engagement he had made with Mr. Percival for a fortnight.
Part of this time he determined to employ in seeing Headly, who did not
live above thirty miles from thence; hoping from him to obtain
intelligence of Emmeline's abode. And that no suspicion might remain on
the mind of his father, he affected to reassume his usual gaiety, and
was to all appearance as volatile and dissipated as ever.

While the family were in Norfolk, their acquaintance was warmly renewed
with that of Sir Francis Devereux, who was lately returned from a
residence on the Continent, whither he had been to compleat the
education of his two daughters, heiresses to his fortune, on the
embellishment of whose persons and manners all the modern elegancies of
education had been lavished.

They were rather pretty women; and of a family almost as ancient and
illustrious as that of Mr. Delamere. Their fortunes were to be immense;
and either of them would have been a wife for Delamere, the choice of
whom would greatly have gratified the families on both sides.

Infinite pains were taken to bring the young people frequently together;
and both the ladies seemed to allow that Delamere was a conquest worthy
their ambition.

As he never refused to entertain them with every appearance of gallantry
and vivacity, Lord Montreville flattered himself that at length Emmeline
was forgotten; and ventured to propose to his son, a marriage with
whichever of the Miss Devereux's he should prefer.

To which, Delamere, who had long foreseen the proposal, answered coldly,
'that he was not inclined to marry at all; or if he did, it should not
be one of those over-educated puppets.'

So far were their acquisitions from having made any impression on his
heart, that the frivolous turn of their minds, the studied ornaments of
their persons, and the affected refinement of their manners, made him
only recollect with more passionate admiration, that native elegance of
person and mind which he had seen only in the Orphan of Mowbray Castle.



