

Emmeline had, for some days, complained of a slight indisposition; and
being somewhat better, had determined to walk out in the evening; but
having rather favoured and indulged her illness, as it gave her a
pretext for avoiding Delamere, whose long and vehement assiduities began
to give great uneasiness to both the ladies, she still answered to their
enquiries that she was too ill to leave her room, and in consequence of
this message, she and Mrs. Stafford, who came to sit with her, soon
afterwards saw the Colonel and Delamere ride by as if for their evening
airing. They kissed their hands as they passed; and as soon as the
ladies believed them quite out of sight, and had observed the way they
had gone, Emmeline, who had confined herself three days to her room, and
who languished for air, proposed a short walk the opposite way, to which
Mrs. Stafford consented; and as soon as the heat was a little abated,
they set out, and enjoyed a comfortable and quiet walk for near an hour;
from which they were returning, when they saw Delamere and Fitz-Edward
riding towards them.

They dismounted, and giving their horses to their servants, joined them;
Delamere reproaching Emmeline for the artifice she had used, yet
congratulating himself on seeing her again. But his eyes eagerly running
over her person, betrayed his extreme anxiety and concern at observing
her pale and languid looks, and the lassitude of her whole frame.

Fitz-Edward, in a whisper, made the same remarks on her appearance to
Mrs. Stafford; who answered, 'that if Mr. Delamere persisted in pursuing
her, she did not doubt but that it would end in her going into a
decline.'

'Say rather,' answered Fitz-Edward artfully, 'that the interesting
languor on the charming countenance of your friend, arises from the
sensibility of her heart. She cannot surely see Delamere, dying for her
as he is, without feeling some disposition to answer a passion so ardent
and sincere: I know it is impossible she should. It is only your Stoic
prudence, your cold and unfeeling bosom, which can arm itself against
all the enthusiasm of love, all the tenderness of friendship. Miss
Mowbray's heart is made of softer materials; and were it not for the
inhuman reserve you have taught her, poor Delamere had long since met a
more suitable return to an attachment, of which, almost any other woman
would glory in being the object.'

There was something in this speech particularly displeasing to Mrs.
Stafford; who answered, 'that he could not pay her a compliment more
gratifying, than when he told her she had been the means of saving Miss
Mowbray from indiscretion; though she was well convinced, that her own
excellent understanding, and purity of heart, made any monitor
unnecessary.'

'However,' continued she, 'if you think that _my_ influence has
prevented her entering into all the wild projects of Mr. Delamere,
continue to believe, that while I am with her the same influence will
invariably be exerted to the same purpose.'

Delamere and Emmeline, who were a few paces before them while this
dialogue was passing, were now met by Parkinson, the colonel's servant,
who addressing himself to Delamere, told him that Lord Montreville and
one of the young ladies were that moment alighted from their carriage at
the inn, and had sent to his lodgings to enquire for him.

Mrs. Stafford advancing, heard the intelligence, and looked anxiously at
Emmeline, who turned paler than death at the thoughts of Lord
Montreville.

Delamere was alternately red and pale. He hesitated, and tried to
flatter himself that Parkinson was mistaken; while Fitz-Edward, who
found he should be awkwardly situated between the father and son,
silently meditated his defence.

Mrs. Stafford, who saw Emmeline ready to sink with the apprehension of
being seen walking with Delamere, intreated the gentlemen to leave them
and go to Lord Montreville; which she at length prevailed on them to do;
Delamere pressing Emmeline's hand to his lips, and protesting, with a
vehemence of manner particularly his own, that no power on earth should
oblige him to relinquish her.

Mrs. Stafford got the trembling Emmeline home as well as she could;
where she endeavoured to strengthen her resolution and restore her
spirits, by representing to her the perfect rectitude with which she had
acted.

But poor Delamere, who had no such consolatory reflections, felt very
uneasy, and would willingly have avoided the immediate explanation which
he saw must now take place with his father.

He determined, however, to temporize no longer; but being absolutely
fixed in his resolution of marrying Emmeline, to tell his father so, and
to meet all the effects of his anger at once.

In this disposition, he desired Fitz-Edward to leave him; and he entered
alone the parlour of the inn where Lord Montreville waited for him. His
countenance expressed a mixture of anger and confusion; while that of
his Lordship betrayed yet sterner symptoms of the state of his mind.

Augusta Delamere, her eyes red with weeping, and her voice faultering
through agitation, arose, and met her brother half-way.

'My dear brother!' said she, taking his hand.

He kissed her cheek; and bowing to his father, sat down.

'I have taken the trouble to come hither, Sir,' said Lord Montreville,
'in consequence of having received information of the wicked and
unworthy pursuit in which you have engaged. I command you, upon your
duty, instantly to return with me, and renounce for ever the scandalous
project of seducing an innocent young woman, whom _you_ ought rather to
respect and whom _I_ will protect.'

'I intend ever to do both, Sir; and when she is my wife, you will be
released from the task of protecting her, and will only have to love her
as much as her merit deserves. Be assured, my Lord, I have no such
designs against the honour of Miss Mowbray as you impute to me. It is my
determined and unalterable intention to marry her. Would to God your
Lordship would conquer the unreasonable prejudice which you have
conceived against the only union which will secure the happiness of your
son, and endeavour to reconcile my mother to a marriage on which I am
resolved.'

Having pronounced these words in a resolute tone, he arose from his
seat, bowed slightly to his father, and waving his hand to his sister,
as if to prevent her following him, he walked indignantly out of the
room.

Lord Montreville made no effort to stop him. But the recollection of the
fatal indulgence with which he had been brought up recurred forcibly to
his Lordship's mind; and he felt his anger against his son half subdued
by the reproaches he had to make himself. The very sight of this darling
son, was so gratifying, that he almost forgot his errors when he beheld
him.

After a moment's pause, Lord Montreville said to his daughter, 'You see,
Augusta, the disposition your brother is in. Violent measures will, I
fear, only make him desperate. We must try what can be done by Miss
Mowbray herself, who will undoubtedly consent to elude his pursuit, and
time may perhaps detach him from it entirely. For this purpose, I would
have _you_ see Emmeline to-morrow early; and having talked to her, we
can consider on what to determine. To night, try to recover your
fatigue.'

'Let me go to night, Sir,' said his daughter.--'It is not yet more than
eight o'clock, and I am sensible of no fatigue that should prevent my
seeing the young lady immediately.'

Lord Montreville assenting, Miss Delamere, attended by a servant, walked
to the house of Mrs. Watkins.

The door was opened by the good woman herself; and on enquiry for Miss
Mowbray, she desired the lady to walk in, and sit down in her little
room, while she went up to let Miss know.--'For I can't tell,' said she,
(folding up a stocking she was knitting) 'whether she be well enough to
see a strange gentlewoman. She have been but poorly for this week; and
to night, after she came from walking, she was in such a taking, poor
thing, we thought she'd a had a fit; and so Madam Stafford, who is just
gone, bid her she should lie down a little and keep quiet.'

This account, added to the disquiet of the fair mediatrix; who fancied
the heart of Emmeline could hardly fail of being of Delamere's party,
and that uneasiness at his father's arrival occasioned the agitation of
her spirits which Mrs. Watkins described.

Mrs. Watkins returned immediately, saying that Miss Emmy would be down
in a moment.

Emmeline instantly guessed who it was, by the description of the young
Lady and the livery of the servant who attended her: and now, with a
beating heart and uncertain step, she entered the room.

Miss Delamere had been prepared to see a very beautiful person: but the
fair figure whom she now beheld, though less dazlingly handsome than she
expected, was yet more interesting and attractive than she would have
appeared in the highest bloom of luxuriant beauty. Her late illness had
robbed her cheeks of that tender bloom they usually boasted; timidity
and apprehension deprived her of much of the native dignity of her
manner; yet there was something in her face and deportment that
instantly prejudiced Miss Delamere in her favour, and made her
acknowledge that her brother's passion had at least personal charms for
it's excuse.

A silent curtsey passed between the two ladies--and both being seated,
Miss Delamere began.--

'I believe, Miss Mowbray, you know that my father, Lord Montreville, in
consequence of a letter received from Mrs. Stafford, who is, he
understands, a friend of your's, arrived here this morning.'

'The letter, madam, was written at my particular request; that my Lord
did not notice it sooner, has, believe me, given me great concern.'

'I do sincerely believe it; and every body must applaud your conduct in
this affair. My father was, by accident, prevented receiving the letter
for some weeks: as soon as it reached him, we set out, and he has now
sent me to you, my dear cousin (for be assured I am delighted with the
relationship) to consult with you on what we ought to do.'

Emmeline, consoled yet affected by this considerate speech, found
herself relieved by tears.

'Though I am unable, madam,' said she, recovering herself, 'to advise,
be assured I am ready to do whatever you and Lord Montreville shall
dictate, to put an end to the projects your brother so perseveringly
attempts. Ah! Miss Delamere; my situation is singularly distressing. It
demands all your pity; all your father's protection!'

'You have, you shall have both, my dear Emmeline! as well as our
admiration for your noble and heroic conduct; and I beg you will not, by
being thus uneasy, injure your health and depress your spirits.'

This and many other consoling speeches, delivered in the persuasive
voice of friendly sympathy, almost restored Emmeline to her usual
composure; and after being together near an hour, Miss Delamere took her
leave, charmed with her new acquaintance, and convinced that she would
continue to act with the most exact obedience to the wishes of Lord
Montreville.



