

Lord Montreville, on hearing from his daughter what had passed between
her and Emmeline, was disposed to hope, that since she was so willing to
assist in terminating for ever the views of Delamere, they should be
able to prevail on him to relinquish them.

While Miss Delamere was with Emmeline, his Lordship had himself waited
on Mrs. Stafford, to whom he thought himself obliged.

He thanked her for the letter with which she had favoured him; and said,
'that having heard of the great regard with which she honoured Miss
Mowbray, he waited on her to beg her advice in the present difficult
circumstance. Since Mr. Delamere has pursued her hither,' said his
Lordship, 'she cannot remain here; but to find a situation that will be
proper for her, and concealed from him, I own appears so difficult, that
I know not on what to determine.'

'My Lord,' answered Mrs. Stafford, 'I intended to have asked your
Lordship's permission to have been favoured with Miss Mowbray's company
for some months; and still hope to be indulged with it when I return
home. But could I go thither now, which I cannot, (my house not being in
a condition to receive me,) it would be impossible to prevent Mr.
Delamere's knowledge of her abode, if she was with me. But surely Mr.
Delamere will leave this place with you, and will not oblige Miss
Mowbray to quit her home to avoid him.'

'Ah, madam!' answered Lord Montreville, 'you do not yet know my son. The
impetuosity of his temper, which has never been restrained, it is now
out of my power to check; whatever he determines on he will execute, and
I have too much reason to fear that opposition only serves to strengthen
his resolution. While Emmeline is here, it will be impossible to prevail
on him to quit the place: and though her behaviour has hitherto been
irreproachable and meritorious, how can I flatter myself that so young a
woman will continue steadily to refuse a marriage, which would not only
relieve her at once from the difficulties and dependance of her
situation, but raise her to an elevated rank, and a splendid fortune.'

'To which,' said Mrs. Stafford, 'she would do honour. I do not, however,
presume to offer my opinion to your Lordship. You have, undoubtedly,
very strong reasons for your opposition to Mr. Delamere's wishes: and
his affluent fortune and future rank certainly give him a right to
expect both the one and the other in whoever he shall marry. But a more
lovely person, a better heart, a more pure and elegant mind, he will no
where meet with. Miss Mowbray will reflect as much credit as she can
borrow, on any family to which she may be allied.'

'I acknowledge, madam, that Miss Mowbray is a very amiable young woman;
but she never can be the wife of my son; and you I am sure are too
considerate to give any encouragement to so impossible an idea.'

After some farther conversation, Mrs. Stafford promised to endeavour to
recollect a proper situation for Miss Mowbray, where she might be
secured from the importunities of Delamere; and his Lordship took his
leave.

By six o'clock the next morning, Delamere was at Mrs. Watkins's door;
and nobody being visible but the maid servant, he entered the parlour,
and told her he wanted to speak with Miss Mowbray; but would wait until
she arose.

The maid told her mistress, who immediately descended; and Delamere, who
was known to her as a young Lord who was in love with Miss Emmy, was
courteously invited to her own parlour, and she offered to go up with
any message he should be pleased to send.

He begged she would only say to Miss Mowbray that a gentleman desired to
speak to her on business of consequence.

But the good woman, who thought she could do more justice to her
employer, told Emmeline, who was dressing herself, that 'the handsome
young Lord, as used to walk every night with her and Madam Stafford, was
below, and wanted to speak to her directly.'

At this information, Emmeline was extremely alarmed. She considered
herself as particularly bound by what had passed the evening before
between her and Augusta Delamere, to avoid her brother; and such an
interview as he now demanded must have an appearance to Lord Montreville
of which she could not bear to think. She desired Mrs. Watkins,
therefore, to let the gentleman know that she was not well, and could
not see any body.

'Why, Lord, Miss!' exclaimed the officious landlady, 'what can you mean
now by that? What! go for to refuse seeing such an handsome young man,
who is a Lord, and the like of that? I am sure it is so foolish, that I
shan't carry no such message.'

'Send Betty with it then,' answered Emmeline coldly; 'let her inform the
gentleman I cannot be seen.'

'Well,' said Mrs. Watkins, as she descended, 'it is strange nonsense, to
my fancy; but some folks never knows what they would be at.'

She then returned to the parlour, and very reluctantly delivered the
answer to Mr. Delamere; who asked if Emmeline was really ill?

'Ill,' said the complaisant hostess, 'I see nothing that ails her: last
night, indeed, she was in a desperate taking, and we had much ado to
hinder her from going into a fit; but to day I am sure she looks as if
she was as well as ever.'

Delamere asked for a pen and ink, with which she immediately furnished
him; and as she officiously offered to get him some breakfast, he
accepted it to gain time. While it was preparing he sent up to Emmeline
the following note:


    'I came hither to entreat only one quarter of an hour's
  conversation, which you cruelly deny me! You determine then,
  Emmeline, to drive me to despair!

    'You may certainly still refuse to see me; but you cannot oblige
  me to quit this place, or to lose sight of your abode. My father
  will, therefore, gain nothing by his ill-judged journey hither.

    'But if you will allow me the interview I solicit, and after it
  still continue to desire my absence, I will give you my promise to
  go from hence to-morrow.

                                                        F. DELAMERE.'


The maid was sent up with this billet to Emmeline; who, after a moment's
consideration, determined to send it to Miss Delamere, and to tell her,
in an envelope, how she was situated.

Having enclosed it therefore, and desired the maid to go with it without
saying whither she was going, she bid her, as she went through the
house, deliver to Mr. Delamere another note, which was as follows:


  'Sir,

    'Your request of an interview, I think myself obliged on every
  account to refuse. I am extremely sorry you determine to persevere
  in offering me proposals, to which, though they do me a very high
  and undeserved honour, I never ought to listen; and excuse me if I
  add, that I never will.

                                                  EMMELINE MOWBRAY.'


Emmeline had not before so positively expressed her rejection of
Delamere's addresses. The peremptory stile, therefore, of this billet,
added to his extreme vexation at being overtaken by his father, and the
little hope that seemed to remain for him any way, operated altogether
on his rash and passionate disposition, and seemed to affect him with a
temporary phrenzy. He stamped about the room, dashed his head against
the wainscot, and seizing Mrs. Watkins by the arm, swore, with the most
frightful vehemence, that he would see Miss Mowbray though death were in
the way.

The woman concluding he was mad, screamed out to her husband, who
descending from his chamber in astonishment, put himself between his
wife and the stranger, demanding his business?

'Alack-a-day!' cried Mrs. Watkins, 'tis the young Lord. He is gone mad,
to be sure, for the love of Miss up stairs!'

Emmeline, who in so small a house could not avoid hearing all that
passed, now thought it better to go down; for she knew enough of
Delamere to fear that the effects of his fit of passion might be very
serious; and was certain that nothing could be more improper than so
much confusion.

She therefore descended the stairs, with trembling feet, and entered
Mrs. Watkins's parlour; where she saw Delamere, his eyes flashing fire
and his hands clenched, storming round the room, while Watkins followed
him, and bowing in his awkward way, 'begged his Honour would only please
to be pacified.'

There was something so terrifying in the wild looks of the young man,
that Emmeline having only half opened the door, retreated again from it,
and was hastening away. But Delamere had seen her; and darting out after
her, caught her before she could escape out of the passage, and she was
compelled to return into the room with him; where, on condition of his
being more composed, she agreed to sit down and listen to him.

Watkins and his wife having left the room, Delamere again renewed his
solicitations for a Scottish expedition. 'However averse,' said he, 'my
father and mother may at present be to our marriage, I know they will be
immediately reconciled when it is irrevocable. But if you continue to
harden your heart against me, of what advantage will it be to them?
Their ambition will still suffer; for I here swear by all that is
sacred, that then I never will marry at all; and by my dying without
posterity, their views will for ever be abortive, and their projects
disappointed.'

To this, and every other argument Delamere used, Emmeline answered,
'that having determined never to accept of his hand, situated as she at
present was, nothing should induce her to break through a determination
which alone could secure her the approbation of her own heart.'

He then asked her, 'whether, if the consent of Lord and Lady Montreville
could be obtained, she would continue averse to him?'

This question she evaded, by saying, 'that it was to no purpose to
consider how she should act in an event so unlikely to happen.'

He then again exerted all the eloquence which love rather than reason
lent him. But Emmeline combated his arguments with those of rectitude
and honour, by which she was resolutely bent to abide.

This steadiness, originating from principles he could not controvert or
deny, seemed, while it shewed him all its hopelessness, to give new
force to his passion. He became again almost frantic, and was anew
acting the part of a madman, when Mrs. Stafford and Miss Delamere
entered the house, and enquiring for Miss Mowbray, were shewn into the
room where she was with Delamere; who, almost exhausted by the violence
of those emotions he had so boundlessly indulged, had now thrown himself
into a chair, with his head leaning against the wainscot; his hair was
dishevelled, his eyes swoln, and his countenance expressed so much
passionate sorrow, that Augusta Delamere, extremely shocked, feared to
speak to him; while Emmeline, on the opposite side of the room, sat with
her handkerchief to her eyes; and as soon as she saw Mrs. Stafford, she
threw herself into her arms and sobbed aloud.

Delamere looked at Mrs. Stafford and his sister, but spoke to neither;
till Augusta approaching him, would have taken his hand; but he turned
from her.

'Oh, Frederic!' cried she, 'I beseech you to consider the consequence of
all this.'

'I consider nothing!' said he, starting up and going to the window.

His sister followed him.

'Go, go,' said he, turning angrily from her--'Go, leave me, leave me!
assist Lord Montreville to destroy his only son! go, and be a party in
the cruel policy that will make you and Fanny heiresses!'

The poor girl, who really loved her brother better than any thing on
earth, was quite overwhelmed by this speech; and her tears now flowed as
fast as those of Emmeline, who continued to weep on the bosom of Mrs.
Stafford.

Delamere looked at them both with a stern and angry countenance; then
suddenly catching his sister by the hand, which he eagerly grasped, he
said, in a low but resolute voice--'Tears, Augusta, are of no use. Do
not lament me, but try to help me. I am now going out for the whole day;
for I will not see my father only to repeat to him what I have already
said. Before I return, see what you can do towards persuading him to
consent to my marriage with Miss Mowbray; for be assured that if he does
not, the next meeting, in which I expect his answer, will be the last we
shall have.'

He then snatched up his hat, and disengaging himself from his sister,
who attempted to detain him, he went hastily out of the house; leaving
Mrs. Stafford, Miss Mowbray, and his sister, under great uneasiness and
alarm.

They thought it necessary immediately to inform Lord Montreville of the
whole conversation, and Miss Delamere dispatched a note to Fitz-Edward,
desiring him to attend to the motions of his friend.

Fitz-Edward was at breakfast with Lord Montreville; who took the first
opportunity of their being alone, to reproach him with some severity for
what he had done.

The Colonel heard him with great serenity; and then began to justify
himself, by assuring his Lordship that he had accompanied Delamere only
in hopes of being able to detach him from his pursuit, and because he
thought it preferable to his being left wholly to himself. He declared
that he meant to have given Lord Montreville information, if there had
appeared the least probability of Delamere's marriage; but that being
perfectly convinced, from the character of Emmeline, that there was
nothing to apprehend, he had every day hoped his friend would have
quitted a project in which there seemed not the least likelihood of
success, and would have returned to his family cured of his passion.

Though this was not all strictly true, Fitz-Edward possessed a sort of
plausible and insinuating eloquence, which hardly ever failed of
removing every impression, however strong, against him; and Lord
Montreville was conversing with him with his usual confidence and
friendship, when the note from Miss Delamere was brought in.

His Lordship, ever anxious for his son, gazed eagerly at it while
Fitz-Edward read it; and trembling, asked from whom it came?

Fitz-Edward put it into his hand; and having ran it over in breathless
terror, his Lordship hurried out, directing all his servants to go
several ways in search of Delamere; while he entreated Fitz-Edward to
run to whatever place he was likely to be in; and went himself to Mrs.
Stafford's lodging, who was by this time returned home.

What he heard from her of the scene of the morning, contributed to
encrease his alarm. The image of his son in all the wildness of
ungovernable passion, shook his nerves so much, that he seemed ready to
faint, yet unable to move to enquire where he was. As he could attend to
nothing else, Mrs. Stafford told him how anxiously she had thought of a
situation for Emmeline, and that she believed she had at length found
one that would do, 'if,' said she, 'your Lordship cannot prevail on him
to quit Swansea, which I think you had better attempt, though from the
scene of this morning I own I despair of it more than ever.

'The person with whom I hope to be able to place Miss Mowbray is Mrs.
Ashwood, the sister of Mr. Stafford. She has been two years a widow,
with three children, and resides at a village near London. She has a
very good fortune; and would be happy to have with her such a companion
as Miss Mowbray, 'till I am so fortunate as to be enabled to take her
myself. As her connections and acquaintance lie in a different set of
people, and in a remote part of the country from those of Mr. Delamere,
it is improbable, that with the precaution we shall take, he will ever
discover her residence.'

Lord Montreville expressed his sense of Mrs. Stafford's kindness in the
warmest terms. He assured her that he should never forget the friendly
part she had taken, and that if ever it was in his power to shew his
gratitude by being so happy as to have the ability to serve her or her
family, he should consider it as the most fortunate event of his life.

Mrs. Stafford heard this as matter of course; and would have felt great
compassion for Lord Montreville, whose state of mind was truly
deplorable, but she reflected that he had really been the author of his
own misery: first, by bringing up his son in a manner that had given
such boundless scope to his passions; and now, by refusing to gratify
him in marrying a young woman, who was, in the eye of unprejudiced
reason, so perfectly unexceptionable. She advised him to try once more
to prevail on his son to leave Swansea with him; and he left her to
enquire whether Fitz-Edward had yet found Delamere, whose absence gave
him the most cruel uneasiness.

Fitz-Edward, after a long search, had overtaken Delamere on an
unfrequented common, about a mile from the town, where he was walking
with a quick pace; and seeing Fitz-Edward, endeavoured to escape him.
But when he found he could not avoid him, he turned fiercely towards
him--'Why do you follow me, Sir? Is it not enough that you have broken
through the ties of honour and friendship in betraying me to my father?
must you still persecute me with your insidious friendship?'

Fitz-Edward heard him with great coolness; and without much difficulty
convinced him that Miss Mowbray herself had given the information to
Lord Montreville by means of Mrs. Stafford.

This conviction, while it added to the pain and mortification of
Delamere, greatly reconciled him to Fitz-Edward, whom he had before
suspected; and after a long conversation, which Fitz-Edward so managed
as to regain some degree of power over the passions of his impetuous
friend, he persuaded him to go and dine with Lord Montreville; having
first undertaken for his Lordship that nothing should be said on the
subject which occupied the thoughts of the father; on which condition
only the son consented to meet him.



