

As soon as there was any probability of Emmeline's being visible the
next morning, Delamere was at Clapham.

The servant of whom he enquired for her, told him, that Miss Mowbray had
not yet rung her bell, and that as it was later than her usual hour, she
was afraid it was owing to her being ill.

Alarmed at this intelligence, Delamere eagerly questioned her further;
and learned that the preceding morning, a gentleman who had never been
there before, had been to see Miss Mowbray, and had staid with her about
three quarters of an hour, during which he had talked very loud; and
that after he was gone, she had hastened to her own room, crying sadly,
and had seemed very much vexed the whole day afterwards. That when she
went to bed, which was early in the evening, she had sighed bitterly,
and said she was not well. The servants, won by the sweetness and
humanity with which Emmeline treated them, all seemed to consider her
health and happiness as their own concern; and the girl who delivered
this intelligence to Delamere, had been very much about her, and knowing
her better, loved her more than the others.

Delamere could not doubt the truth of this account; yet he could not
conjecture who the stranger could be, in whose power it was thus to
distress Emmeline. But dreading lest some scheme was in agitation to
take her from him, he sat in insupportable anxiety 'till she should
summons the maid.

Her music book lay open on a _piano forte_ in the breakfast parlour. A
song which he had a few days before desired her to learn, as being one
which particularly charmed him, seemed to have been just copied into it,
and he fancied the notes and the writing were executed with more than
her usual elegance. Under it was a little _porte feuille_ of red
morocco. Delamere took it up. It was untied; and two or three small
tinted drawings fell out. He saw the likeness of Mrs. Stafford, done
from memory; one yet more striking of his sister Augusta; and two or
three unfinished resemblances of persons he did not know, touched with
less spirit than the other two. A piece of silver paper doubled together
enclosed another; he opened it--it was a drawing of himself, done with a
pencil, and slightly tinged with a crayon; strikingly like; but it
seemed unfinished, and somewhat effaced.

Though among so many other portraits, this could not be considered as a
very flattering distinction, Delamere, on seeing it, was not master of
his transports. He now believed Emmeline (whom he could never induce to
own that her partiality for him exceeded the bounds of friendship) yet
cherished in her heart a passion she would not avow.

While he was indulging these sanguine and delicious hopes, he heard a
bell ring, and flew to enquire if it was that of Emmeline?

The maid, who crossed the hall to attend it's summons, told him it was.
He stepped softly up stairs behind the servant, and waited at the door
of the chamber while she went in.

To the question, from the maid, 'how she did?' Emmeline answered, 'much
better.'

'Mr. Delamere is here, Madam, and begs to know whether he may see you?'

Emmeline had expected him all the day before, and was not at all
surprised at his coming now. But she knew not what she should say to
him. To dissimulate was to her almost impossible; yet to tell him what
had passed between her and Sir Richard Crofts was to create dissentions
of the most alarming nature between him and his father; for she knew
Delamere would immediately and warmly resent the harshness of Lord
Montreville.

She could not however determine to avoid seeing Delamere; and she
thought his Lordship was not entitled to much consideration, after the
indelicate and needless shock he had given her, by employing the
peremptory, insolent, and unfeeling Sir Richard Crofts.

After a moment's hesitation, she told Nanny to let Mr. Delamere know
that as soon as she was dressed she would be with him in the parlour.

Delamere, who heard the message, stepped softly down stairs, replaced
the drawings, and waited the entrance of Emmeline; who neither requiring
or accustoming herself to borrow any advantage from art or ornament, was
soon dressed in her usual simple undress.

But to give some appearance of truth to what she intended to alledge, a
cold, in excuse for her swollen eyes and languid looks, she wrapt a
gauze hood over her head, and tied a black ribband round her throat; for
tho' she could not wholly conceal the truth from Delamere, she wished to
prevent his seeing how much it had affected her.

When she entered the room, Delamere, who was at the door to meet her,
was astonished at the alteration he saw in her countenance.

'You are ill, Emmeline?' said he, taking her hand.

'I am not quite well--I have a violent cold coming.'

'A cold?' eagerly answered Delamere, 'you have been crying--who was the
person who called on you yesterday?'

It was now in vain to attempt concealment if she had intended it.

'He did not tell me his name, for our conversation was very short; but
his servants told those of Mrs. Ashwood that his name is Sir Richard
Crofts.'

'And what business could Sir Richard Crofts possibly have with you?'

Emmeline related the conversation with great fidelity and without
comment.

Delamere had hardly patience to hear her out. He protested he would
immediately go to Sir Richard Crofts, and not only force him to
apologize for what had passed, but promise never again to interfere
between Lord Montreville and his family.

From executing this violent measure, Emmeline by earnest entreaty
diverted him. She had not yet recovered the shock given her by the
unwelcome interview of the preceding day; and though she had a very
excellent constitution, her sensibility of mind was so great, that when
she suffered any poignant uneasiness, it immediately affected her frame.
In the present state of her spirits, she could not hear Delamere's
vehement and passionate exclamations without tears; and when he saw how
much she was hurt, he commanded himself; spoke more calmly; and by a
rapid transition from rage to tenderness, he wept also, and bathed her
hands with his tears.

He was not without hopes that this last effort of Lord Montreville would
effect a change in his favour; and he pleaded again for an elopement
with the warmest eloquence of love.

But Emmeline, though she felt all the force of his arguments, had still
the courage to resist them; and all he could obtain from her was a
renewal of her former promise, neither to leave Mrs. Ashwood unknown to
him or to conceal the place of her residence; to consent to see him
wherever she should be, and positively to reject Mr. Rochely's offer.

In return, she expected from Delamere some concessions which nothing but
the sight of her uneasiness would have induced him to grant. At length
she persuaded him to promise that he would not insult Sir Richard
Crofts, or commit any other rashness which might irritate Lord
Montreville.

Nothing was a stronger proof of the deep root which his passion had
taken in his heart, than the influence Emmeline had obtained over his
ungovernable and violent spirit, hitherto unused to controul, and
accustomed from his infancy to exert over his own family the most
boundless despotism.

Emmeline, tranquillized and consoled by his promises, then entreated him
to go; as the state of Mrs. Ashwood's family made visitors improper. In
this, too, he obeyed her. And as soon as he was gone, Emmeline sat down
to write to Mrs. Stafford, related briefly what had lately happened, and
told her, that as soon as Lord Montreville could be induced to settle
some yearly sum for her support, (which notwithstanding his threats she
still thought he would do, on condition of her engaging never, without
his consent, to marry Delamere,) she would set out for Woodfield.

Lord Montreville, absorbed in politics and in a negociation with
ministry, had, on the evening when he and his son were at Lord
Dornock's, forgotten the impatient temper and particular situation of
Delamere. His non appearance at supper occasioned an enquiry, and it was
found he had left the house. It was too late for Lord Montreville to
follow him that night, and would, indeed, have been useless; but early
the next morning he was in Berkley-square, where he heard nothing of his
son.

He received a letter from Sir Richard Crofts, relating the ill success
of his embassy; but adding, that he would bring Rochely to his Lordship
the next day, to consider together what was next to be done. A letter
also soon after arrived from Lady Montreville, to let his Lordship know
that herself and her daughter, with Lady Mary and Miss Otley, were
coming to town the next evening.

Delamere, the tumult of whose spirits was too great immediately to
subside, took, for the first time in his life, some pains to conquer
their violence, in consideration of Emmeline.

He sent his servants to Berkley-square, to enquire among the domestics
what had passed. He thence learned that his father had returned in the
morning from Lord Dornock's in very ill humour, and that his mother was
expected in town. An interview with either, would, he was conscious,
only be the occasion of that dissention he had promised Emmeline to
avoid. His mother, he knew, came to town determined to keep no terms
with him; and that she would incessantly harrass him with reproaches or
teize him with entreaties. He therefore determined to avoid entirely all
conversation with both; and after a short reflection on the best means
to do so, he ordered Millefleur to discharge the lodgings; told him and
his other two servants that he was going out of town, and should not
take either them or his horses; therefore would have them go to
Berkley-square, and wait there his return. He bade his valet tell Lord
Montreville that he should be absent ten days or a fortnight. Then
ordering an hackney coach, he directed it to drive to Westminster
Bridge, as if he meant there to take post: instead of which he dismissed
it at the end of Bridge-street; and walking over to the Surry side, he
presently provided himself with lodgings under the name of Mr. Oswald, a
gentleman just come from Ireland; and all traces of Mr. Delamere were
lost.


    END OF THE FIRST VOLUME




VOLUME II



