

When they arrived at Clapham, Emmeline found Mrs. Ashwood was not yet
returned. Fitz-Edward entreated her to sing to him; and either was, or
pretended to be, in raptures at her improvement since they had met in
the summer.

About half an hour after four, Mrs. Ashwood came in; and throwing open
the parlour door, asked Emmeline, in no very sweet accent, 'Why she had
given her the trouble to go in her carriage to Berkley-square, if she
intended going home by any other conveyance?'

Mrs. Ashwood was subject to causeless fits of ill-humour, to which
Emmeline was a good deal accustomed; and concluding she was now seized
with some sudden discomposure of temper, mildly answered, 'That she
supposed there had been a mistake; for that the chariot did not come for
her at the appointed time.'

'Mistake!' replied the other lady, sharply; 'I don't know as to mistake;
but if you had chosen it, you might have staid dinner with Lady
Montreville.'

Emmeline, without seeming to attend to the asperity of the address,
desired to introduce Colonel Fitz-Edward.

As this short dialogue had passed without Mrs. Ashwood's having entered
the room, she had not seen the stranger, who now advanced towards her.

The title of Colonel, added to his military air and handsome figure,
seemed to gain at once her favourable opinion; and her countenance
losing the unpleasing expression of ill-temper, immediately put on its
best smile, and an affectation of softness and complacency with which
she frequently adorned it.

She seemed to consider the handsome young soldier as a conquest worthy
all her ambition; and finding he was the most intimate friend of
Delamere, had no apprehension that his admiration would be diverted by
the youth and attractions of Emmeline.

Fitz-Edward presently understood her character; and with admirable
adroitness acted the part of a man afraid of being too much charmed. He
cast an arch look at Emmeline; then made to the Lady of the house some
compliments so extravagant, that only the weakest vanity could prevent
her seeing its ridicule. But Fitz-Edward, who found in a moment that
nothing was too gross to be believed, fearlessly repeated the dose; and
before dinner came in, she was in the best humour imaginable, and
pressed him so earnestly to partake of it, that, after an apology for
sitting down in his morning dishabille, he consented.

The same unlimited flattery was continued during dinner by Fitz-Edward,
and received by the lady with the same avidity; and Emmeline, tho'
half-angry with him for the pleasure he seemed to take in making Mrs.
Ashwood absurd, could not help being amused with the scene.

Before their repast ended, she was so much charmed with her new
acquaintance, and so much longed to shew him to her female friends, and
her other admirers, that she could not forbear pressing him to stay to a
card party, which she was to have in the evening.

He loved the ridiculous; and, influenced by a vanity as silly as that he
delighted to expose, he took pleasure in shewing how extremely absurd he
could make women appear, who were not on other occasions void of
understanding. Tho' he had really business with Lord Montreville, who
had left several messages at his lodgings desiring to see him, and was
going thither when Emmeline met him, yet he accepted Mrs. Ashwood's
invitation, on condition of being allowed to go home to dress.

He was no sooner gone than she flew to her toilet, and Emmeline to a
second perusal of the letter she had received from Augusta Delamere.


    'I am forbidden to see you, my dearest Emmeline; and perhaps may
  not have an opportunity of giving you this. My heart bleeds for
  you, my sweet friend. I fear my father will be prevailed upon
  wholly to abandon you. They are all inventing schemes to force you
  into a marriage with that odd-looking old Rochely. He has been here
  once or twice, and closetted with my father; and part
  of the scheme of to-day is, to persuade you to dine here with
  him. But I am almost sure you will not stay; for unless my mother
  can command herself more before you than she does when she is
  talking about you, I think you will be frightened away. I am
  certain, my dear Emmeline, from what I have heard, tho' they say
  but little before me, that no endeavours will be omitted to drive
  you to marry Rochely; and that they will persecute you every way,
  both by persuasions, and by distressing you. But be assured, that
  while Augusta Delamere has any thing, you shall share it. Indeed I
  love you, not only as if you were my sister, but, I think, better.
  Ah! why are there such unhappy impediments to your being really so?
  At present I foresee nothing but perplexity; and have no dependance
  but on you. I know you will act as you ought to do; and that you
  will at last prevail with Delamere to act right too. Whoever loves
  you, cannot long persist in doing ill; and surely it is very ill
  done, and very cruel, for Delamere to make us all so unhappy. I
  need not tell you to arm yourself with fortitude against the
  attacks that will be made upon you. You have more fortitude and
  resolution than I have. Situated as you have been, I know not what
  _I_ should have done; but I fear it would not have been so worthy
  of praise as the noble and disinterested part you have acted;
  which, tho' unaccompanied with the thousand amiable qualities of
  heart and understanding you possess, would ever command the esteem
  and admiration of your faithful and affectionate

                                                    AUGUSTA DELAMERE.'

    'Do not write to me till you hear from me again; as I should incur
  great displeasure if known to correspond with you.

                                                                A. D.'


Charmed as Emmeline was by the tender solicitude and affectionate
simplicity of her beloved friend, the pleasure this letter gave her was
very much abated by learning that the domestic infelicity of Lord
Montreville's family fell particularly heavy on her. She now recollected
what Mrs. Ashwood had said on her first entrance into the room, when she
returned home; and concluded from thence that she had seen Lady
Montreville, tho' her whole attention was so immediately engrossed by
the Colonel, that she had no more named it. She therefore grew anxious
to hear what had been said; and her own toilet being very soon over, she
sent to desire admittance to that of Mrs. Ashwood; on receiving which,
she attended her, and begged to know whether she had seen Lady
Montreville, and what had passed?

Mrs. Ashwood was in so happy a disposition, that she hesitated not to
oblige her; and while she finished the important business of
accommodating a pile of black feathers, jet and crape, upon her head,
'the mockery of woe' which she did not even affect to feel, she gave
Emmeline the following account, interlarded with directions to her
woman.

'Why, my dear, you must know that when I got to Gainsborough's [_more to
the left_] he had unluckily a frightful old judge, or a bishop, or some
tedious old man with him, and I was forced to wait: I cannot tell what
possessed me, but I entirely forgot that I was to send the chariot back
for you. So the chariot [_put it a little forwarder_] staid. I thought
the tiresome man, whoever he was, would never have gone; however he went
at last [_raise the lower curl_] and then I _sot_. You cannot think how
much the likeness is improved! So when I had done [_give me the scraper;
here is some powder on my eye-brow_] I went away, thinking to call on
you; but as I went by Butler's, I remembered that I wanted some
pearl-coloured twist to finish the purse I am doing for Hanbury. I was
almost an hour matching it. Well, then I thought as I was so near
Frivolite's door, I might as well call and see whether she had put the
trimming on the white bombazeen, as you know we agreed would be most the
thing. There were a thousand people in the house; you know there is
never any possibility of getting out of that creature's room under an
hour.' [Oh! heaven! thought Emmeline, nor is there any end to the
importance you affix to trifles which interest nobody else.] 'So,
however, at last I got to Berkley-square, and stopped at the door. The
man at the door said you was gone. I thought that very odd, and desired
another servant go up and see, for I concluded it was some mistake.
After a moment or two, the footman came down again, and said if I was
the Lady Miss Mowbray lived with, his Lady desired I would walk up. Upon
my word it is a noble house! When I got into the room, there was Lady
Montreville and her daughters. Her Ladyship was extremely polite,
indeed; and after some discourse, "Mrs. Ashwood," said she, "you know
Miss Mowbray's situation: I assure you I sent for her to-day with no
other view in the world but for her own good, and you know, [_dear me!
here is a pimple on my chin that is quite hideous; give me a patch._]
you know that for her to refuse Mr. Rochely is being absolutely blind to
her own interest; because you must suppose, Mrs. Ashwood, that she is
only deceiving herself when she entertains any thoughts of my son; for
that is a thing that never can happen, nor ever shall happen; and
besides, to give my Lord and me all this trouble, is a very ungrateful
return to us for having brought her up, and many other obligations she
has received at our hands; and will be the ruin of herself; and the
greatest perverseness in the world. You, Mrs. Ashwood, are, I hear, a
very sensible woman [_where is the rouge box?_] and I dare say, now you
know how agreeable it would be to me and my Lord to have Miss Emmeline
come to her senses about Mr. Rochely, you will do your endeavours to
persuade her to act reasonably; and then, tho' she has behaved very
disrespectful and very ill, which is only to be forgiven on account of
her knowing no better, I shall countenance her, and so will my Lord."
This was, as near as I remember, Emmeline, what my Lady said to me. You
know [_the milk of roses is almost out_] you know I could not refuse to
tell her I would certainly talk to you. I was surprised to find her
Ladyship so obliging and affable, as you had told me she is reckoned so
very proud. She ordered her gentleman to give me a ticket for a rout and
a supper her Ladyship gives on Tuesday three weeks; and she said, that
as she did not doubt but that you would discover your own interest by
that time, I should take one for you. Look you, here it is.'

'I shall be in Dorsetshire, I hope, long before Tuesday se'nnight,' said
Emmeline, laying the card coolly on the toilet. She found Mrs. Ashwood
had nothing more material to say; and being apprehensive that she
impeded the last finish which her dress and person required, she thanked
her, and went back into her own room.

The eagerness and resolution with which Lady Montreville opposed her
son's marriage, appeared from nothing more evidently, than from her thus
endeavouring to solicit the assistance of Mrs. Ashwood, and humbling
herself to use flattery and insinuation towards a person to whom it is
probable nothing else could have induced her to speak. With persons in
trade, or their connections, or even with gentlemen, unless of very
ancient and honourable families, she seldom deigned to hold any
communication; and if she had occasion to speak to them individually, it
was generally under the appellation of 'Mr. or Mrs. I forget the name;'
for to remember the particular distinctions of such inferior beings, was
a task too heavy for Right Honourable intellects. When she spoke of such
collectively, it was under the denomination of 'the people, or the
folks.'

With that sort of condescension that seems to say, 'I will humble myself
to your level,' and which is in fact more insolent than the most
offensive haughtiness, her Ladyship had behaved to Mrs. Ashwood; who
took it for extreme politeness, and was charmed on any terms to obtain
admission to the house of a woman of such high fashion, and who was
known to be so very nice in the choice of her company.

In return for so much favour, she had been lavish of her assurances that
she would influence Miss Mowbray; and came home, fully determined to
talk to her sharply; believing too, that to make her feel the present
dependance and uncertainty of her situation by forcing her to bear a fit
of ill-humour, might help to determine her to embrace the affluent
fortune that would set her above it. This it was that occasioned her
harsh address to Emmeline; which would have been followed by acrimonious
reflections and rude remonstrances, under the denomination of 'necessary
truths and friendly advice,' had not the presence of Fitz-Edward, and
his subsequent enchanting conversation, driven all that Lady Montreville
had said out of her mind, and left it open only to the delightful
prospect which his compliments and praises afforded her.

The company assembled to cards at the usual hour. Rochely was among
them; who had not seen Emmeline since the rejection of his proposal,
with which Sir Richard Crofts was obliged to acquaint him, tho' he had
softened the peremptory terms in which it had been given. He had this
evening adorned himself in a superb suit of cut velvet of many colours,
lined with sables; which tho' not in the very newest mode, had been
reckoned very magnificent at several city assemblies; and he had put it
on as well in honour of Lord Montreville, with whom he had dined, as in
hopes of moving the perverse beauty for whom he languished. But so far
was this display of clumsy affluence from having any effect on the hard
heart of Emmeline, that it rather excited her mirth. And when with a
grave and solemn aspect he advanced towards her, she felt herself so
much disposed to laugh at his figure, that she was forced to avoid him,
and took refuge at the table, round which the younger part of the
company assembled to play.

Mrs. Ashwood had fixed Fitz-Edward to that where she herself presided;
and where she sat triumphantly enjoying his high-seasoned flattery;
while her female competitors, hearing he was the son of an Irish Earl,
and within three of being a Peer himself, contemplated her supposed
conquest with envy and vexation, which they could not conceal, and which
greatly added to her satisfaction.

Several persons were invited to stay supper; among whom were Fitz-Edward
and Rochely. About half an hour before the card-tables broke up, a
servant brought a note to Emmeline, and told her that it required an
answer. The hand was Delamere's.


    'For two days I have forborne to see you, Emmeline, and have
  endeavoured to argue myself into a calmer state of mind; but it
  avails nothing; hopeless when with you, yet wretched without you, I
  see no end to my sufferings. I have been about the door all the
  evening; but find, by the carriages, that you are surrounded by
  fools and coxcombs. Ah! Emmeline! that time you owe only to me;
  those smiles to which only I have a right, are lavished on them;
  and I am left to darkness and despair.

    'There is a door from the garden into the stable-yard, which opens
  into the fields. As I cannot come to the house (where I find there
  are people who would inform Lord Montreville that I am still about
  London,) for pity's sake come down to that door and speak to me. I
  ask only _one_ moment; surely you will not deny me so small a
  favour, and add to the anguish which consumes me. I write this from
  the neighbouring public-house, and wait your answer.

                                                         F. DELAMERE.'


Emmeline shuddered at this note. It was more incoherent than usual, and
seemed to be written with a trembling and uncertain hand. She had left
the card-table to read it, and was alone in the anti-room; where, while
she hesitated over it, Rochely, whose eyes were ever in search of her,
followed her. She saw him not: but wholly occupied by the purport of the
note, he approached close to her unheeded.

'Are you determined, Miss Mowbray,' said he, 'to give me no other answer
than you sent somewhat hastily to Lord Montreville, by my friend Sir
Richard Crofts? May I ask, are you quite determined?'

'Quite, Sir!' replied she, starting, without considering and hardly
knowing what she said; but feeling he was at that moment more odious to
her than ever, she snatched away the hand he attempted to take, and flew
out of the room like a lapwing.

The dismayed lover shook his head, surveyed his cut velvet in the glass,
and stroaked his point ruffles, while he was trying to recollect his
scattered ideas.

Emmeline, who had taken refuge in her bed-chamber, sat there in
breathless uncertainty, and unable to determine what to do about
Delamere. At length, she concluded on desiring Fitz-Edward to go down to
him; but knew not how to speak to the colonel on such a subject before
so many witnesses, nor did she like to send for him out of the room. She
rung for a candle, and wrote on a slip of paper.

'Delamere is waiting at a door which opens into the fields, and insists
upon speaking to me. Pray go down to him, and endeavour to prevail on
him to return to his father. I can think of no other expedient to
prevent his engaging in some rash and improper attempt; therefore I
beseech you to go down.'

When she had written this, she knew not how to deliver it; and for the
first time in her life had recourse to an expedient which bore the
appearance of art and dissimulation. She did not chuse to send it to
Fitz-Edward by a servant; but went down with it herself; and approaching
the table where he was settling his winnings--

'Here, colonel,' said she, 'is the _charade_ you desired me to write out
for you.'

'Oh! read it colonel; pray read it;' cried Mrs. Ashwood, 'I doat upon a
_charade_ of all things in nature.'

He answered, that 'he would reserve it for a _bon bouche_ after supper.'
Then looking significantly at Emmeline, to say he understood and would
oblige her, he strolled into the anti-room; Emmeline saying to him, as
he passed her, that she would wait his return in the parlour below.

Fitz-Edward disappeared; and Emmeline, in hopes of escaping observation,
joined the party of some young ladies who were playing at a large table,
and affected to enter into their conversation. But she really knew
nothing that was passing; and as soon as they rose on finishing their
game, she escaped in the bustle, and ran down into the parlour, where in
five or six minutes Fitz-Edward found her.

He wore a look of great concern; and laid down his hat as he came in,
without seeming to know what he did.

'Have you seen Mr. Delamere, Sir?' said Emmeline.

'Seen him!' answered he; 'I have seen him; but to no manner of purpose;
his intellects are certainly deranged; he raves like a madman, and
absolutely refuses to leave the place till he has spoken to you.'

'Why will he not come in, then?' said Emmeline.

'Because,' said Fitz-Edward, 'Rochely is here, who will relate it to
that meddling fellow, Sir Richard Crofts, and by that means it will get
to his father. I said every thing likely to prevail on him to be more
calm; but he will hear nothing. I know not what to do,' continued he,
rising, and walking about the room. 'I am convinced he has something in
his head of fatal consequence to himself. He protests he will stay all
night where he is. In short, he is in an absolute frenzy with the idea
of Rochely's success and his own despair.'

'You frighten me to death,' said Emmeline. 'Tell me, colonel, what ought
I to do?'

'Go to him,' returned Fitz-Edward; 'speak to him only a moment, and I am
persuaded he will be calm. I will go with you; and then there can be
nothing wrong in it.'

'I _will_ go, then,' said she, rising and giving Fitz-Edward her hand,
which trembled extremely.

'But it is very cold,' remarked he: 'had not you better take a cloak?'

'There is my long _pelisse_ in the back parlour,' answered she.

Fitz-Edward fetched it, wrapt her in it, and led her down stairs; and by
a garden door, they reached a sort of back stable-yard, where rubbish
and stable-litter was usually thrown, and which opened into a bye-lane,
where the garden-wall formed a sudden angle. Delamere received her with
transport, which he tried to check; and reproached her for refusing to
come down to him.

Seizing the opportunity, as soon as he would give her leave to speak,
she very forcibly represented to him the distress of his family at his
absence, and the particular uneasiness it inflicted on his sister
Augusta.

'I knew not,' said Delamere, 'that she was come home.'

Emmeline told him she was, and related the purport of her letter, and
again besought him to put an end to the uncertainty and anxiety of his
family.

Delamere heard her with some impatience; and holding her hands in his,
vehemently answered--'It is to no purpose that my father either
threatens or persuades me. He has long known my resolution; and the
unhappiness which you so warmly describe arises solely from his and my
mother's own unreasonable and capricious prejudice--prejudice founded in
pride and avarice. I do not think myself accountable for distress to
which they may so easily put an end. But as to Augusta, who really loves
me, I will write to her to make her easy. Now Emmeline, since I have
listened to you, and answered all you have to urge, hear my final
determination--_If you_ still continue firm in your chimerical and
romantic obstinacy, which you call honour, _I_ go from hence this
evening, never to return--you condemn me to perpetual exile--you give me
up to despair!'

He called aloud, and a post-chaise and four, which had been concealed by
the projection of the wall, attended by two servants, drove round.
'There,' continued Delamere, 'there is the vehicle which I have prepared
to carry me from hence. You know whether I easily relinquish a
resolution once formed. If then you wish to save my father and mother
from the anguish of repentance when there will be no remedy--if you
desire to save from the frenzy of desperation the brother of your
Augusta, and to snatch from the extremity of wretchedness the man who
lives but to adore you, go with me--go with me to Scotland!'

Astonished and terrified at the impetuosity with which he pressed this
unexpected proposal, Emmeline would have replied, but words were a
moment wanting. Fitz-Edward taking advantage of her silence, used every
argument which Delamere had omitted, to determine her.

'No! no!' cried she--'never! never! I have passed my honour to Lord
Montreville. It is sacred--I cannot, I will not forfeit it!'

'The time will come,' said Fitz-Edward, 'believe me it will, when Lord
Montreville will not only be reconciled to you, but'----

'And what shall reconcile me to myself? Let me go back to the house, Mr.
Delamere; or from this moment I shall consider you as having taken
advantage of my unprotected state, and even of my indiscreet confidence,
to offer me the grossest outrage. Let me go, Sir!' (struggling to get
her hand from Fitz-Edward) 'Let me go! Mr. Delamere.'

'What! to be driven into the arms of Rochely? No, never, Emmeline!
never! I _know_ I am _not_ indifferent to you. I feel that I cannot live
without you; nay, by heaven I will not! But if I suffer this opportunity
to escape, I deserve indeed to lose you.'

They all this while approached the chaise. Delamere had hired servants,
whom he had instructed what to do. They were ready at the door of the
carriage. Emmeline attempted in vain to retreat. Delamere threw his arms
around her; and assisted by Fitz-Edward, lifted her into it with a sort
of gentle violence. He leaped in after her, and the chaise was driven
away instantly.

Fitz-Edward, to whom this scene was wholly unexpected, returned to the
company he had left with Mrs. Ashwood. He had not any notion of
Delamere's design when he went to him, but heartily concurred in its
execution; and tho' he did not believe Delamere intended to marry
Emmeline, yet his morals were such, that he congratulated himself on the
share he had had in putting her into his power, and went back with the
air of a man vastly satisfied with the success of his exploit.

'Goodness! colonel,' exclaimed Mrs. Ashwood, 'supper has been waiting
for you this half hour. Upon my word we began to suspect that you and
Miss Mowbray were gone together. But pray where is she?'

'Miss Mowbray, Madam! I really have not been so happy as to be of her
party.'

'Why, where in the world can she be?' continued Mrs. Ashwood. 'However,
as the colonel is come we will go to supper. [_The company were standing
round the table._] I suppose Miss Mowbray will come presently; she has a
pretty romantic notion of contemplation by moonlight.'

Supper, however, was almost over, and Miss Mowbray did not appear. Mrs.
Ashwood, engaged wholly by the gallant colonel, thought not of her; but
Rochely remarked that her absence was somewhat singular.

'So it is I declare,' said Miss Galton; 'do Mrs. Ashwood send and
enquire for her again.'

The chambers, the drawing-room, dressing-room, closets, and garden were
again searched. Miss Mowbray was not to be found! Mrs. Ashwood was
alarmed--Rochely in dismay--and the whole company confusedly broke up;
each retiring with their several conjectures on the sudden disappearance
of the fair Emmeline.



