

Delamere had taken no precaution to secure horses on the road; and it
was not till after waiting some hours that he procured four from Barnet.
When they arrived there, it was past one o'clock; and Emmeline, who had
gone thro' a very fatigueing day, and was now overcome with the terror
and alarm of being thus hastily snatched away, could hardly sit up. She
was without an hat; and having no change of cloaths, urged the
inconvenience she must endure by being forced to go a long journey so
situated. She wished to have stopped at the first stage; but Delamere
thought, that in her present temper to hesitate was to lose her. He
consented however to go for a moment into the house, where, while he
gave a servant orders to go on to Hatfield to bespeak four horses, she
drank a glass of water; and then Delamere intreating her to return to
the chaise, she complied, for there was nobody visible at the inn but
the maid and ostler; and she saw no likelihood of any assistance, had
she applied for it.

They hastened with great expedition to Stevenage; but before they
reached that place, Emmeline, who had ceased either to remonstrate or
complain, was so entirely overwhelmed and exhausted, that she could no
longer support herself.

His fears for her health now exceeded his fears for losing her, and he
determined to stop for some hours; but when she made an effort to leave
the chaise she was unable, and he was obliged to lift her out of it. He
then ordered the female servants to be called up, recommended her to
their care, and entreated her to go to bed for some hours.

Long darkness and excessive weeping had almost deprived her of sight;
her whole frame was sinking under the fatigue she had undergone both of
body and mind; and unable to struggle longer against it, she lay down in
her cloaths, desiring one of the maids to sit by her.

Delamere came to the door of the room to enquire how she did. The woman
told him what she had requested; and desiring they would obey her in
every thing, and keep her as quiet as possible, he went not to repose
himself, but to write to Fitz-Edward.


  'Dear George,

    'While my angelic Emmeline sleeps, I, who am too happy to sleep
  myself, write to desire you will go to Berkley-square and keep the
  good folks there from exposing themselves, or making a great bustle
  about what has happened, which they will soon know. As my Lord has
  long been prepossessed with the idea of a Scottish jaunt, it is very
  likely he may attempt to pursue us. Say what you will to put such
  plans out of his head. I shall be in London again, in a very short
  time. Farewell, dear George.

                                                        Your's, ever,
                                                                 F. D.'


Emmeline in the mean time fell into a sleep, but it was broken and
interrupted. Her spirits had been so thoroughly discomposed, that rest
was driven from her. She dozed a moment; then suddenly started up,
forgot where she was, and looked wildly round the room. An half-formed
recollection of the events of the preceding day then seemed to recur,
and she besought the maid who sat by her to go to Mr. Delamere and tell
him she must be directly carried to Mrs. Stafford's; and having said
this, and sighed deeply, she sunk again into short insensibility.

Thus past the remainder of the night; and before seven in the morning
Delamere was at the door, impatient to know how she had rested.

The maid admitted him, and told him, in a low voice, that the Lady was
in a quieter sleep than she had been the whole night. He softly
approached the bed, and started in terror when he saw how ill she
looked. Her cheek, robbed of it's bloom, rested on her arm, which
appeared more bloodless than her cheek; her hair, which had been dressed
without powder, had escaped from the form in which it had been adjusted,
and half concealed her face in disordered luxuriance; her lips were
pale, and her respiration short and laborious. He stood gazing on her a
moment, and then, shocked at these symptoms of indisposition, his rapid
imagination immediately magnified them all. He concluded she was dying;
and in an agony of fear, which deprived him of every other idea, he took
up in breathless apprehension her other hand, which lay on the quilt. It
was hot, and dry; and her pulse seemed rather to flutter, than to beat
against his pressure.

His moving her hand awakened her. She opened her eyes; but they had lost
their lustre, and were turned mournfully towards him.

'Delamere,' said she, in a low and tremulous voice, 'Delamere, why is
all this? I believe you have destroyed me; my head is so extremely
painful. Oh! Delamere--this is cruel!--very cruel!'

'Let me go for advice,' cried he, eagerly. 'Wretch that I am, what will
now become of me!'

He ran down stairs; and Emmeline making an effort to recover her
recollection, tried to sit up; but her head was so giddy and confused
that it was not till after several attempts she left the bed, even with
the assistance of the servant. She then drank a glass of water; and
desiring to have more air, would have gone to the window, but could only
reach a chair near it, where she sat down, and throwing her arm on a
table, rested her head upon it.

In a few moments Delamere returned up stairs. His wild looks, and quick,
half-formed questions, explained what passed in his mind.

She told him faintly she was better.

'Shall I bring up a gentleman to see you who I am assured is able in his
profession? I fear you are very ill.'

She answered, 'no!'

'Pray suffer him to come; he will give you something to relieve your
head.'

'No!'

'Do not, Emmeline--do not, I conjure you, refuse me this favour?'

He took her hand; but when he found how feverish she was, he started
away, crying--'Oh! let him, let him come!'

He ran down stairs to fetch him, and returned instantly with the
apothecary; a sensible, well-behaved man, of fifty, whose appearance
indicated feeling and judgement. He approached Emmeline, who still sat
with her head reclined on the table, and felt her pulse.

'Here is too much fever indeed, Sir,' said he; 'the young lady has been
greatly hurried.'

'But what--what is to be done, Sir?' said Delamere, eagerly interrupting
him.

'Quiet seems absolutely necessary. Pardon me, Sir; but unless I know
your situation in regard to her, I cannot possibly advise.'

'Sir,' said Emmeline, who had been silent rather from inability to
contend than from unconsciousness of what was passing round her--'if you
could prevail with Mr. Delamere to restore me to my friends'--

'Come with me, Sir,' cried Delamere; 'let me speak to you in another
room.'

When they were alone, he conjured Mr. Lawson to tell him what he thought
of the lady?

'Upon my word, Sir, she is in a very high fever, and it seems to be
occasioned by extreme perturbation of spirits and great fatigue.
Forgive, Sir, if I ask what particular circumstance has been the cause
of the uneasiness under which she appears to labour? If it is any little
love quarrel you cannot too soon adjust it.'

Delamere stopped his conjectures, by telling him who he was; and gave
him in a few words the history of their expedition.

Mr. Lawson protested to him that if she was hurried on in her present
state, it would be surprising if she survived the journey.

'She shall stay here then,' replied Delamere, 'till she recovers her
fatigue.'

'But, Sir,' enquired Mr. Lawson, 'after what you have told me of your
father, have you no apprehension of a pursuit?'

His terror at Emmeline's immediate danger had obliterated for a moment
every other fear. It now recurred with redoubled violence. He remembered
that Rochely was at Mrs. Ashwood's on the evening of Emmeline's
departure; and he knew that from him Sir Richard Crofts, and
consequently Lord Montreville, would have immediate intelligence.

He struck his hands together, exclaiming, 'She will be every way
lost!--lost irretrievably! If my father overtakes us, she will return
with him, and I shall see her no more!'

He now gave way to such unbounded passion, walking about the room, and
striking his forehead, that Lawson began to believe his intellects were
as much deranged as the frame of the fair sufferer he had left. For some
moments he attended to nothing; but Mr. Lawson, accustomed to make
allowances for the diseases of the mind as well as those of the body,
did not lose his patience; and at length persuaded him to be calmer, by
representing that he wasted in fruitless exclamation the time which
might be employed in providing against the apprehended evil.

'Good God! Sir,' cried he at length, 'what would you have me do?'

'What I would earnestly recommend, Sir, is, that you quiet the young
lady's mind by telling her you will carry her whither she desires to go;
and at present desist from this journey, which I really believe you
cannot prosecute but at the hazard of her life; at present, farther
agitation may, and probably will be fatal.'

'And so you advise me to let her stay till my father comes to tear her
from me for ever! or carry her back by the same road, where it is
probable he will meet me? Impossible! impossible!--but is she really so
very ill?'

'Upon my life she is at this moment in a high fever. Why should I
deceive you? Trust me, it would in my opinion be the height of
inhumanity to carry her into Scotland in such a situation, _if_ you love
her'----

'_If_ I love her, Sir!' cried Delamere, half frantic--'talk not of _if_
I love her! Merciful heaven!--you have no idea, Mr. Lawson, of what I
suffer at this moment!'

'I have a perfect idea of your distress, Sir; and wish I knew how to
relieve it. Give me a moment's time to consider; if indeed the young
lady could'--

'What, Sir? speak!--think of something!'

'Why I was thinking, that if she is better in a few hours, it might be
possible for you to take her to Hertford, where she may remain a day or
two, till she is able to go farther. There you would be no longer in
danger of pursuit; and if she should grow worse, which when her mind is
easier I hope will not happen, you will have excellent advice. Perhaps,
when the hurry of her spirits subsides, she may, since this _has_
happened, consent to pursue the journey to the North; or if not, you can
from thence carry her to the friends she is so desirous of being with,
and avoid the risk of meeting on the road those you are so anxious to
shun.'

Tho' Delamere could not think, without extreme reluctance, of
relinquishing a scheme in which he had thought himself secure of
success; yet, as there was no alternative but what would be so hazardous
to the health of Emmeline, he was compelled to accede to any which had a
probability of restoring it without putting her into the hands of his
father.

Mr. Lawson told him it was only fifteen miles from Stevenage to
Hertford--'But how,' said he, 'will you, Sir, prevent your father's
following you thither, if he should learn at this place that you are
gone there?'

Delamere was wholly at a loss. But Mr. Lawson, who seemed to be sent by
his good genius, said--'We must get you from hence immediately, if Miss
Mowbray is able to go. You shall pass here as my visitors. You shall
directly go to my house, and there be supplied with horses from another
inn. This will at least make it more difficult to trace your route; and
if any enquiry should be made of me, I shall know what to say.'

Delamere, catching at any thing that promised to secure Emmeline from
the pursuit of Lord Montreville, went to her to enquire whether she was
well enough to walk to Mr. Lawson's house.

He found her trying to adjust her hair; but her hands trembled so much,
it was with difficulty she could do it. He desired her to dismiss the
maid who was in the room; then throwing himself on his knees before her,
and taking her burning hands in his, he said--'Arbitress of my
destiny--my Emmeline! thou for whom only I exist! be tranquil--I beseech
you be tranquil! Since you determine to abide by your cruel resolution,
I will not, I dare not persist in asking you to break it. No, Emmeline!
I come only to entreat that you would quiet your too delicate mind; and
dispose of _me_ as you please. Since you cannot resolve to be mine now,
I will learn to submit--I will try to bear any thing but the seeing you
unhappy, or losing you entirely! Tell me only that you pardon what is
past, and you shall go to Mrs. Stafford's, or whithersoever you will.'

Emmeline beheld and heard him with astonishment. But at length
comprehending that he repented of his wild attempt, and would go back,
she said hastily, as she arose from her chair--'Let us go, then,
Delamere; let us instantly go. Thank God, your heart is changed! but
every hour I continue with you, is an additional wound to my character
and my peace.'

She attempted to reach her cloak, but could not; her strength forsook
her; her head became more giddy; she staggered, and would have fallen,
had not Delamere caught her in his arms, and supported her to the chair
she had left.

'Hurry not yourself thus, my Emmeline,' cried he; 'in mercy to me try to
compose yourself, and spare me the sight of all this terror, for which
believe me you have no reason.'

He sat down by her; and drawing her gently towards him, her languid head
reposed on his shoulder, and he contemplated, in silent anguish, the
ravage which only a few hours severe anxiety had made on that beauteous
and expressive countenance.

He called to the maid, who waited in the next room, and desired her to
send up Mr. Lawson; before whose entrance a shower of tears, the first
she had shed for some hours, a little relieved the full heart of
Emmeline.

Mr. Lawson desired Delamere would not check her tears; and in a friendly
and consolatory manner told her what Delamere proposed to do. Emmeline,
after this explanation, was still more anxious to depart; but Mr. Lawson
greatly doubted whether she was able.

'I can walk, indeed I can,' said she, 'if you will each lend me an arm.'

Mr. Lawson then gave her a few drops in a glass of water, which seemed
to revive her; and Delamere wrapping her carefully in her cloak, they
led her between them to a neat brick house in the town, where Mrs.
Lawson, a matron-like and well-behaved woman, and her daughter, a
genteel girl of twenty, who had been apprized of Emmeline's situation,
received her with great kindness and respect.

Breakfast was prepared for her, but she could eat nothing. The heaviness
of her eyes, her pallid countenance, and the tenseness across her
temples, seemed to threaten the most alarming consequences. Mrs. Lawson
endeavoured to persuade her to go to bed; but her eagerness to be gone
from thence was so great, that she evidently encreased the difficulty by
endeavouring to surmount it. She had indeed considered, that if Lord
Montreville overtook them, which was not only possible but probable, all
the merit of her conduct would be lost.--She would appear to be carried
back, not by her strict adherence to her promise, but by the authority
of his Lordship; and instead of the pride and credit of a laudable and
virtuous action, would be liable to bear all the imputation of
intentional guilt. This reflection, added to the sense she could not
fail to have of her improper situation in being so long alone with
Delamere under the appearance of having voluntarily gone off with him,
made her so impatient to be gone, that she declined any repose however
necessary; and Mr. Lawson thought there was less to be feared from
indulging than from opposing her.

Lawson therefore went himself to hasten the horses; and while he was
absent, Emmeline, who remained with his wife, expressed so much fear
that Delamere might alter his intentions of returning, and so much
uneasiness at the thoughts of being seen at another inn, in the
disordered dress she now wore, with a young man of Delamere's
appearance, that Mrs. Lawson was truly concerned for her, and
communicated to Delamere the source of the extreme anxiety she appeared
to suffer.

He came to her; and she gently reproached him for all the inconvenience
and uneasiness he had brought upon her. Her soft complaints, and the
distress pictured on her speaking face, he felt with a degree of anguish
and self-reproach that made him happy to agree to a plan proposed by
Mrs. Lawson, which was, that she should be accommodated with cloaths of
Miss Lawson's, and that Miss Lawson herself should accompany her to
Hertford.

This latter offer, Emmeline eagerly accepted; and Delamere, who saw how
much it soothed and relieved her, did not object to it. She was
therefore immediately equipped with a morning dress, and her agitation
of mind seemed to subside; but changing her cloaths, trifling as the
exertion was, fatigued her so much, that Mr. Lawson on his return looked
very grave; and Delamere, who watched his looks as if his existence
depended upon his opinion, was wild with apprehension. The chaises (for
Delamere had ordered one for himself, that the ladies might suffer no
inconvenience by being crouded) were ready, and Lawson recollecting that
Emmeline would require a more quiet situation than an inn could afford,
told her that he had a sister at Hertford who would receive her with
pleasure, and accommodate her at her house as long as she would
stay--'And remember,' added he, 'that Lissy is to continue with you till
you leave Hertford.'

Emmeline, extremely sensible of all she owed to this excellent man,
could only sigh her thanks; and to shorten them, Mr. Lawson put her and
his daughter into the travelling chaise which Delamere had bought for
this expedition. Delamere followed in another; and between one and two
o'clock they arrived at Hertford, and were set down at the door of an
elegant house; where Mrs. Champness, the wife of a man of fortune,
received her niece with great affection; and having heard in another
room the history of the young lady she had with her, immediately gave
orders to have a bed-chamber prepared, and shewed the utmost solicitude
for her accommodation.

Delamere, seeing her so well situated for the night, and happy to find
she bore her short journey with less increase of fatigue than he
apprehended, consented at her request to leave her, and went to the inn,
where he dined, and soon afterwards returned to enquire after her.

Miss Lawson came down to him, and told him Miss Mowbray was in bed, and
had taken a medicine Mr. Lawson had sent to compose her; but that it was
yet impossible to say much of her situation. She told him he must by no
means attempt to see her for the remaining part of the day, and begged
he would himself try to take some repose: to which salutary advice
Delamere at length consented; his haggard looks and exhausted spirits
sufficiently testifying how much he wanted it.



