

The evening on which Emmeline had been so suddenly missing from the
house of Mrs. Ashwood, Rochely had left it in as much anguish as his
nature was capable of feeling.

He had not for many years so seriously thought of matrimony as since he
had seen Miss Mowbray. Her beauty first attracted him: the natural
civility of her manner was by him, who had frequently met only contempt
and derision from the young and beautiful, construed into encouragement;
and though his hopes had been greatly damped by his knowledge of
Delamere's attachment to her, yet they were almost as quickly revived by
the great encouragement to persevere, which he had received from Lord
Montreville. He fancied that the barriers between her and Delamere being
insurmountable, she could not fail of being dazzled by so splendid a
fortune as he could himself offer her. That evening, she looked more
than usually lovely, and he determined with new ardour to pursue her.
But her disappearance put an end to all his brilliant visions; and
convinced him that his wealth, on which he had so long been accustomed
to value himself, had failed of procuring him the favour of the only
woman with whom he was disposed to share it. He was too well convinced
that Delamere had carried her off: and though deprived of all hope for
himself, he was too angry at the good fortune of his rival to forbear an
attempt to disturb him in it's possession. He drove therefore from
Clapham to the house of Sir Richard Crofts, where he had the
mortification of hearing that Sir Richard was gone with Lord Montreville
to the country house of Lord Dornock, and was not expected to return
'till the next day.

Rochely, aware that the only possible chance of preventing Delamere's
marriage was by an immediate pursuit, was greatly chagrined at this
unavoidable delay. He sat down, however, and with his usual laboured
precision wrote to Sir Richard Crofts, informing him of what had
happened. This was the operation of near an hour; and he then sent off a
man on horseback with it, who arriving at Lord Dornock's about three in
the morning, roused the family with some difficulty, and delivered to
Sir Richard the intelligence, which was immediately conveyed to Lord
Montreville; who having read Mr. Rochely's letter, could not flatter
himself with any hope that this alarm might be as groundless as one he
had before had on the same subject.

The disobedience of his son; the broken faith of Emmeline; and the rage,
complaints, and reproaches of Lady Montreville, all arose together in
his imagination; and anger, vexation, and regret, took possession of his
heart.

He had recourse in this, as in all other emergences, to Sir Richard
Crofts, who advised him immediately to pursue them.

As soon therefore as the sleeping servants could be collected, and the
carriage prepared, his Lordship and Sir Richard set out for London
together.--Lord Montreville determining to follow the fugitives as
expeditiously as possible, though he hoped but little success from the
pursuit.

Such was his apprehension of the clamours and passions of his wife, that
he could not determine to see her 'till he had at least done all that
was possible to recover her son. He therefore wrote to her a short
letter, stating briefly what had happened, and giving her hopes that he
should be able to overtake the parties before they were married. This he
ordered to be delivered to her in the morning; and directed his servant
to hasten to him with his travelling chaise and four post horses.

The man, however, who had the care of the carriages, believing his Lord
would stay out all night, had gone out also, and taken with him the
keys.

By this delay, and the blunders of the affrighted servants, who in their
haste only impeded each other, it was near nine o'clock before his
Lordship and Sir Richard left London. At Barnet, they heard of the
fugitives, and easily traced them from thence to Hatfield; after which
believing all farther enquiries useless, they passed through Stevenage
(having sent on before for horses,) without asking any questions which
might have led them to discover that Delamere and Emmeline had gone from
thence towards Hertford only an hour and an half before their arrival.

This was fortunate for the pursued; for an enquiry would probably have
led to questions which Mr. Lawson would have found it very difficult to
evade.

Lord Montreville, however, and Sir Richard, hurried on to Buckden; where
being obliged to get out for some refreshment for themselves and their
servants, his Lordship renewed the question--'At what time did a young
gentleman and lady' (describing Delamere and Emmeline) 'pass by?'

The people told him they remembered no such persons about the time he
named.

Lord Montreville then applied at the other houses, and made several
other enquiries; but received only a general assertion that no such
persons had been that way within the last four and twenty hours, or even
within a week.

Sir Richard Crofts, who piqued himself upon his sagacity, told his
Lordship that stupidity, the love of falsehood, or Delamere's bribes,
might occasion this failure of intelligence; but there could be no doubt
of their being gratified with better information when they got to
Stilton. To Stilton therefore they went, but heard exactly the same
answers as they had done at the last stage.

Sir Richard was now again to seek for some plausible conjecture that
might quiet the apprehensive anxiety of Lord Montreville, who guessed
and dreaded he knew not what.

He now said, that as there could be no doubt of the young people's
having gone _towards_ Scotland, from the information they had obtained
at Barnet and Hatfield, it was most likely that in the apprehension of a
pursuit they had afterwards quitted the high road, and were advancing to
the borders of Scotland across the country, which must considerably
lengthen and impede their journey; therefore if they themselves
proceeded directly to the town where these marriages are usually
celebrated, the probability was that they should arrive before Delamere
and Miss Mowbray; and by such a circumstance the connection would be as
effectually prevented as it could be by their overtaking them on the
road.

Lord Montreville, despairing of being able by any means to obstruct a
marriage on which his son seemed to be so determined, and harrassed in
mind as much as he was fatigued in body, suffered himself to be carried
forward merely through inability to determine what he could do better;
and though quite hopeless of it's success, pursued his journey.

The innocent cause of all this trouble and anxiety remained in the mean
time at the hospitable house of Mrs. Champness; where Miss Lawson
attended her with all possible kindness and solicitude. It was indeed
impossible to be with her without loving her; unless to an heart
insensible, like that of Mrs. Ashwood, to all but her own ideal
perfections; or steeled by pride, like that of Lady Montreville.

A night passed in quiet sleep had greatly restored her; and her fever,
though not gone, was considerably abated. Every noise, however trifling,
still made her start; her nerves were by no means restored to their
tone, and her spirits continued to be greatly affected. The idea which
seemed to press most painfully on her mind, was the blemish which the
purity of her character must sustain by her being so long absent with
Delamere--a blemish which she knew could hardly ever be removed but by
her returning as his wife.

But to break her promise to Lord Montreville; a promise so solemnly
given; and to be compelled into a marriage which, however advantageous
and fortunate it would appear under other circumstances, would now bring
with it a severe alloy of mortification in the displeasure of his
family; was a measure which she could not determine to pursue.

Her resentment towards Delamere for what was passed was not yet enough
subdued by his reluctant repentance, to reconcile her to the thoughts of
putting herself again into his power. Yet she could not suppose he would
suffer her to return to London alone, if she had courage to attempt it;
or was she sure that when there, Mrs. Ashwood would receive her.

These reflections made her so restless and uneasy that she could not
conceal their source from Miss Lawson; who, tho' possessed of a very
good understanding, was too young and too little acquainted with the
world to be able to advise her.

The handsome person and high rank of Delamere, and his violent love and
concern for Emmeline, made her suppose it impossible that she could help
returning it, or be long able to resist his importunity. She concluded
therefore that finally it would be a match; and was impressed with a
sentiment that amounted almost to veneration for Miss Mowbray, whom she
considered as a prodigy of female virtue and resolution.

Delamere had been several times to speak to Miss Lawson; and he had
pleaded the violence of his passion with so much effect, that the
soft-hearted girl became his warm advocate with Emmeline, and
represented his tenderness and his contrition, 'till she consented (as
she was now able to sit up) to admit him.

On his entrance, he said something, he hardly knew what, to Emmeline.
She held out her hand to him in token of forgiveness. He seized it
eagerly, and pressed it to his heart, while he gazed on her face as if
to enquire there what passed in hers.

'Remember, Delamere,' said she, 'remember I am content to forgive your
late rash and absurd attempt, only on condition of your giving me the
most positive assurance that you will carry me directly to Mrs.
Stafford's, and there leave me.'

Hard as these terms appeared, after the hopes he had entertained on
undertaking the journey, he was forced to submit; but it was evidently
with reluctance.

'I do promise then,' said he, 'to take you to Mrs. Stafford's; but'----

'But what?' asked Emmeline.

'Do you not mean, when you are there, to exclude me for ever?--Mrs.
Stafford is no friend of mine.'

'I have already told you, Mr. Delamere, that I will see you wherever I
am, under certain restrictions: and tho' your late conduct might, and
indeed ought to induce me to withdraw that promise, yet I now repeat it.
But do not believe that I will therefore be persecuted as I have been;
recollect that I have already been driven from Mowbray Castle, from
Swansea, and from Mrs. Ashwood's, wholly on your account.'

'Your remedy, my Emmeline, is, to consent to inhabit a house of your
own, and suffer me to be the first of your servants.'

The varying colour of her complexion, to which the emotions of her mind
restored for a moment the faint tints of returning health, made Delamere
hope that her resolution was shaken; and seizing with his usual
vehemence on an idea so flattering, he was instantly on his knees before
her imploring her consent to prosecute their journey, and intreating
Miss Lawson's assistance, to move her inexorable friend.

Emmeline was too weak to bear an address of this sort. The feebleness of
her frame ill seconded the resolution of her mind; which,
notwithstanding the struggles of pity and regard for Delamere, which she
could not entirely silence, was immoveably determined. Rallying
therefore her spirits, and summoning her fortitude to answer him, she
said--'How _can_ you, Sir, solicit a woman, whom you wish to make your
wife, to break a promise so solemn as that I have given to your father?
Could you hereafter have any dependance on one, who holds her integrity
so lightly? and should you not with great reason suspect that with her,
falsehood and deception might become habitual?'

'Not at all,' answered Delamere. 'Your promise to my father is nugatory;
for it ought never to have been given. He took an unfair advantage of
your candour and your timidity; and all that you said ought not to bind
_you_; since it was extorted from you by _him_ who had no right to make
such conditions.'

'What! has a father no right to decide to whom he will entrust the
happiness of his son, and the honour of his posterity? Alas! Delamere,
you argue against yourself; you only convince me that I ought not to put
the whole happiness of my life into the hands of a man, who will so
readily break thro' his first duties. The same impatient, pardon me, if
I say the same selfish spirit, which now urges you to set paternal
authority at defiance, will perhaps hereafter impel you, with as little
difficulty, to quit a wife of whom you may be weary, for any other
person whom caprice or novelty may dress in the perfections you now
fancy I possess. Ah! Delamere! shall I have a right to expect tenderness
and faith from a man whom I have assisted in making his parents unhappy;
and who has by my means embittered the evening of their lives to whom he
owes his own? Do you think that a rebellious and unfeeling son is likely
to make a good husband, a good father?'

'Death and madness!' cried Delamere, relapsing into all the violence of
his nature--'what do you mean by all this! Selfish! rebellious!
unfeeling!--am I then _so_ worthless, _so_ detestable in your eyes?'

His extravagant expressions of passion always terrified Emmeline; but
the paroxysm to which he now yielded, alarmed her less than it did Miss
Lawson, who never having seen such frantic behaviour before, thought him
really mad. She tremblingly besought him to sit down and be calm; while
the pale countenance of Emmeline which she shewed him, convinced him he
must subdue the violence of his transports, or hazard seeing her relapse
into that alarming state which had forced him to relinquish his project.
This observation restored his senses for a moment.--He besought her
pardon, with tears; then again cursed his own folly, and seemed on the
point of renouncing the contrition he had just assured her he felt. The
scene lasted till Emmeline, quite overcome with it, grew so faint that
she said she must go to bed; and then Delamere, again terrified at an
idea which he had forgot but the moment before, consented to retire if
she would again repeat her forgiveness.

She gave him her hand languidly, and in silence. He kissed it; and half
in resentment, half in sorrow, left her, and returned to the inn, in a
humour which equally unfitted him for society or solitude. Obliged,
however, to remain in the latter, he brooded gloomily over his
disappointment; and believing Emmeline's life no longer in danger, he
fancied that his fears had magnified her illness. He again deprecated
his folly for having consented to relinquish the prosecution of his
journey, and for having agreed to carry her where he feared access to
her would be rendered rare and difficult, by the inflexible prudence and
watchful friendship of Mrs. Stafford. Sometimes he formed vague projects
to deceive her, and carry her again towards Scotland; then relinquished
them and formed others. He passed the night however nearly without
sleep, and the morning found him still irresolute.

At eight o'clock, he went to the house of Mrs. Champness; and Miss
Lawson came down to him, but with a countenance in which uneasiness was
so visible, that Delamere was almost afraid of asking how Miss Mowbray
did.

She told him that she had passed a restless and uncomfortable night, and
that the conversation he had held the evening before had been the cause
of an access of fever quite as high as the first attack; and, that tho'
she tried to conquer her weakness, and affected ability to prosecute a
journey for which she hourly grew more eager, it was easy to see that
she was as unfit for it as ever. Miss Lawson added, that if in a few
hours she was not better, she should send to Mr. Lawson to come from
Stevenage to see her. This account renewed with extreme violence all the
former terrors of Delamere, which a few hours before he had been trying
to persuade himself were groundless.

He now reproached himself for his thoughtless cruelty; and Miss Lawson
seized this opportunity to exhort him to be more cautious for the
future, which he readily and warmly protested he would be. He promised
never again to give way to such extravagant transports, and pressed to
be admitted to see Emmeline; but Miss Lawson would by no means suffer
him to see her 'till she was more recovered from the effects of his
frenzy.

In the afternoon, he was allowed to drink tea in Emmeline's room, and
expressed his sincere concern for his indiscretion of the evening
before. He tried, by shewing a disposition to comply with all her
wishes, to obliterate the memory of his former indiscretion. Emmeline
was willing to forget the offence, and pardon the offender, on his
renewing his promise to take her the next day towards London, on her
route into Dorsetshire; if she should be well enough to undertake the
journey.

The spirit and fortitude of Emmeline, fatal as they were to his hopes,
commanded the respect, esteem, and almost the adoration of Delamere;
while her gentleness and kindness oppressed his heart with fondness so
extreme, that he was equally undone by the one and the other, and felt
that it every hour became more and more impossible for him to live
without her.

It was agreed, that as it would be impossible to reach Woodfield from
Hertford, without stopping one night on the road, they would proceed
thro' London to Staines the first day, and from thence go on early the
next to the house of Mrs. Stafford.

After lingering with her as long as he could, Delamere took his leave
for the evening, determined to observe the promises he had made her, and
never again to attempt to obtain her but by her own consent. When he
made these resolves, he really intended to adhere to them; and was
confirmed in his good resolutions when he the next morning found her
ready to trust herself with him, calm, chearful, full of confidence in
his promises, and of gentleness and kindness towards him.

Emmeline took an affectionate leave of her amiable acquaintance, Miss
Lawson, whose uncommon kindness, on so short a knowledge of her, filled
her heart with gratitude. She promised to write to her as soon as she
got to Woodfield, and to return the cloaths she had borrowed, to which
she secretly purposed adding some present, to testify her sense of the
civilities she had received.

Delamere enclosed, in a letter which he sent by Miss Lawson to her
father, a bank note, as an acknowledgment of his extraordinary kindness.

They quickly arrived in London; and as Emmeline still remained in the
resolution of avoiding a return to Mrs. Ashwood, they changed horses in
Piccadilly to go on.

Tho' by going to her former residence she might have escaped a longer
continuation, and farther journey, with Delamere, of the impropriety of
which she was very sensible; yet she declined it, because she knew that
as her adventure might be explained several ways, Mrs. Ashwood and Miss
Galton were very likely to put on it the construction least in her
favour; and she was very unwilling to be exposed to their questions and
comments, till she could, in concert with Mrs. Stafford, and with her
advice, give such an account of the affair as would put it out of their
power to indulge that malignity of remark at her expence of which she
knew they were capable.

She therefore dispatched a servant to Mrs. Ashwood with a note for her
cloaths, whom Delamere directed to rejoin them at Staines.

At that place they arrived early in the evening; and Emmeline, to whom
Delamere had behaved with the utmost tenderness and respect, bore her
journey without suffering any other inconvenience than some remaining
languor, which was now more visible in her looks than in her spirits.
Charmed with the thoughts of so soon seeing Mrs. Stafford, and feeling
all that delight which a consciousness of rectitude inspires, she was
more than usually chearful, and conversed with Delamere with all that
enchanting frankness and sweetness which made her general conversation
so desireable.



