

The maid who waited on Emmeline had no sooner heard these particulars,
than conceiving her to be more interested in the fate of Delamere than
any other person, she ran up to tell her of it; and tho' she had not
retained the name of Elkerton perfectly, Emmeline, who instantly
recollected the adventure at Staines, saw the truth at once; and was
terrified at the impending event to a degree that made her for a moment
incapable of reflection.

To be, however remotely, or however innocently, the cause of any man's
hazarding his life, was shocking to all her feelings. But to suppose
that Lord Montreville might be made by her means the most wretched of
human beings, by the loss of an only and beloved son, was an idea which
froze her blood.

Her regard for Delamere, which was the affection of a sister somewhat
heightened perhaps by his persevering preference of herself, her
friendship for Augusta, and her anxiety for the peace of his whole
family, added to her general tenderness of heart, all co-operated to
distress her on this occasion. As soon as she could recollect what was
best to be done, she sought Mr. Stafford, to whom she related what she
had heard, which the servant who had brought the intelligence repeated
before him.

Mr. Stafford, at Emmeline's earnest request, set out for the house of
Delamere, who had not that day been at Woodfield because he expected
Fitz-Edward. Mr. Stafford delivered to him a pressing entreaty from
Emmeline that he would forbear to meet Elkerton, or at least delay it
'till she could speak to him; but Delamere shewing Stafford the letter
he had received, desired him to go back and make Emmeline easy as well
as he could, since to comply with her request was entirely out of his
power. To the necessity of his meeting Elkerton, Stafford assented; and
returned home to relate the little success of his embassy, while the
terror and alarm of Emmeline were only encreased by his visit.

Such was her anxiety, that she would have gone herself to Tylehurst, if
Mrs. Stafford had not represented to her that it would be certainly
improper, and probably ineffectual.

She passed a sleepless night, tormenting herself with a thousand
imaginary modes of misery which might arise from the meeting of the next
day. But while she continued to form and reject projects for preventing
it, seven o'clock passed, and the _rencontre_ ended without bloodshed;
the cautious valour of Elkerton having been so loud, that a magistrate
who lived in the town, and who was well known to Lord Montreville, had
heard of it, and, with a party of constables, had followed Elkerton at
some distance. They concealed themselves, by the justice's order, in a
gravel-pit near the place of combat, and there saw the ground already
possessed by Delamere and Fitz-Edward.

The trembling challenger, with a face as pale as if Delamere's pistol
had already done it's worst, followed by Jackman, on whose undaunted
countenance he cast a rueful and imploring look, then rode slowly up,
punctual to the time.

The usual ceremonies passed, Elkerton's blood seemed to be all gone to
his heart, to encourage it to be stout; and his knees, which trembled
most piteously, appeared to resent the desertion. He cast round the
heath a hopeless look--no succour approached! The ground was measured;
each took their post; and his trembling encreased so violently, that
Delamere apprehended very little from a pistol in so unsteady a hand.
But had he apprehended more, he was of a temper to receive it,
unshrinkingly. The moment to fire now arrived; and Elkerton, while
cocking his pistol, saw the _posse_ rise out of the gravel-pit; but he
was too far gone to be sensible of the seasonable relief; therefore,
without knowing what he was about, he fired his pistol before they could
seize his arm, and then stood like a statue, nearly insensible of the
happiness of his deliverance.

The justice advancing himself on horseback, now put both the gentlemen
under arrest: and Elkerton seeing himself at length safe for the
present, thought he might venture to insist on standing Mr. Delamere's
fire. The more the worthy justice opposed it, the more vehement he grew:
but Delamere, who despised him too much to be really angry with him,
went off the field, telling Elkerton that any other time, when there
were fewer witnesses, he would give him what further satisfaction he
might require. He gave his honour to the justice that he would trouble
himself no farther about the affair; and Elkerton having given Jackman's
bail for his present pacific intentions, was suffered to go also.

He returned to the house of his East Indian friend, exulting secretly in
his escape, and openly in his valour, to which latter Jackman did not
bear testimony so warmly as he thought friendship required. Determined,
however, to lose no part of the glory which he thought he had dearly
purchased by being frightened out of his wits, he wrote, in the form of
a letter, a most tremendous account of the duel to the daily papers, in
which he described all it's imaginary horrors, and ended with asserting
very roundly, that 'Mr. Elkerton had the misfortune dangerously to wound
the Hon. Frederic Delamere; and, when this account came away, there were
no hopes of his recovery.'

Having secured himself a fame, at least, for two or three days, he set
out for London to enjoy it; never reflecting on any other consequences
than those most flattering to his ridiculous vanity. He knew he should
be talked of; and by representing what had _not_ happened, have a fair
opportunity of telling what _had_, in his own way.

When Emmeline, who had never ceased walking about and listening, saw
Delamere and Fitz-Edward riding quietly across the lawn which led to the
house, she ran eagerly down to meet them: but the idea that Elkerton
might possibly be killed checked her joy; and when they came up to her,
breathless agitation prevented her asking what she wanted to know.
Delamere, who saw her so pale and terrified, threw himself instantly
off his horse and caught her in his arms.

'Has no harm happened, Mr. Delamere?'

'None in the world, my Emmeline. Nobody is hurt so much as you are; tho'
poor Elkerton was almost as much frightened. Come, pray compose
yourself--you have not yet the glory to boast of having a life lost
about you.'

'Heaven forbid that I ever should!' answered she--'I am grateful that
there has been no mischief!--Oh! if I could describe what I have
suffered, surely you would never terrify me so again.'

She could not restrain her tears. Delamere led her into the house;
where, while Mrs. Stafford gave her hartshorn and water, Delamere, at
her request, related exactly what had happened: and having given
Emmeline his honour that he would think no more of the affair if
Elkerton did not, the tranquillity of the house seemed to be restored,
and Delamere and Fitz-Edward were invited to dinner; where great
alteration in the looks of the latter, was remarked by both the ladies.
Nor was it in looks only that Fitz-Edward was extremely changed.--His
chearfulness was quite gone; he appeared to be ineffectually struggling
with some unconquerable uneasiness; and tho' his soft and insinuating
manners were the same, he no longer sought, by a thousand agreeable
sallies and lively anecdotes, to entertain; or whatever attempt he made
was so evidently forced, that it lost it's success. Remarkable for his
temperance at table, for which he had often endured the ridicule of his
companions, he now seemed to fly to the bottle, against his inclination,
as if in hopes to procure himself a temporary supply of spirits.

Every day after that on which Emmeline and Mrs. Stafford made this
remark, it's justice was more evident.

While Delamere was in the fields, Fitz-Edward would sit whole mornings
with Mrs. Stafford and Emmeline, leaning on their work-table, or looking
over Emmeline, busied with her pencil. Had his marked attention to Mrs.
Stafford continued, she would have seen his behaviour with great alarm;
but he no longer paid her those oblique yet expressive compliments of
which he used to be so lavish. It seemed, as if occupied by some other
object, he still admired and revered her, and wished to make her the
confidant of the sorrow that oppressed him. If they were accidentally
alone, he appeared on the point of telling her; then suddenly checking
himself, he changed the discourse, or abruptly left her; and as he was a
man whom it was impossible to know without receiving some impressions in
his favour, she felt, as well as Emmeline, a pity for him, which they
wished to be justified in feeling, by hearing that whatever was the
cause of his unhappiness, he had not brought it on himself by any crime
that would make their regard for him blameable.--For Emmeline, tho' she
knew that it was with no good design he had contributed to Delamere's
getting her off, yet could not persuade herself to hate him for it, when
he not only humbly solicited her forgiveness, but protested that he was
truly rejoiced, as well as astonished at her steadiness and good
conduct; and would be so far from encouraging any such attempt for the
future, that he would be the first to call Delamere to an account, could
he suppose he harboured intentions which he now considered as ungenerous
and criminal.

These declarations had made his peace both with Emmeline and her friend;
and his languid and sentimental conversation, tho' it made him less
entertaining, did not make him less interesting to either of them.

Mr. Stafford, ever in pursuit of some wild scheme, was now gone for a
few days into another county, to make himself acquainted with the
process of manuring land with old wigs--a mode of agriculture on which
Mr. Headly had lately written a treatise so convincing, that Mr.
Stafford was determined to adopt it on his own farm as soon as a
sufficient number of wigs could be procured for the purpose.

During this absence, and on the fourth day after Elkerton's exploit, a
stormy morning had driven Delamere from the fields; who went into Mrs.
Stafford's dressing-room, where he found Fitz-Edward reading Cecilia to
Mrs. Stafford and Miss Mowbray while they sat at work.

Mrs. Stafford had her two little boys at her feet; and when Delamere
appeared, she desired him to take a chair quietly, and not disturb so
sober a party. But he had not been seated five minutes, before the
children, who were extremely fond of him, crept to him, and he began to
play with them and to make such a noise, that Mrs. Stafford laughingly
threatened to send all the riotous boys into the nursery together--when
at that moment Millefleur, who had some time before come down to attend
his master, entered the room with a letter which he said came express
from Berkley-square.

Delamere saw that his father's hand had almost illegibly directed it. He
opened it in fearful haste, and read these words--


    'Before this meets you, your mother will probably be no more. A
  paragraph in the newspaper, in which you are said to have been
  killed in a duel, threw her into convulsions. I satisfied myself of
  your safety by seeing the man with whom you fought, but your mother
  is incapable of hearing it. Unhappy boy! if you would see her
  alive, come away instantly.

   MONTREVILLE.'

  _Berkley-square, Feb. 29._


It is impossible to say whether the consternation of Emmeline or that of
Delamere was the greatest. By the dreadful idea of having occasioned his
mother's death, every other was for a moment absorbed. He flew without
speaking down stairs, and into the stable where he had left his horse;
but the groom had carried the horse to his own stables, supposing his
master would stay 'till night. Without recollecting that he might take
one of Mr. Stafford's, he ran back into the room where Emmeline was
weeping in the arms of her friend, and clasping her wildly to his bosom,
he exclaimed--'Farewell, Emmeline! Farewell, perhaps, for ever! If I
lose my mother I shall never forgive _myself_; and shall be a wretch
unworthy of _you_. Dearest Mrs. Stafford! take care I beseech you of
her, whatever becomes of me.'

Having said this, he ran away again without his hat, and darted across
the lawn towards his own house, meaning to go thither on foot; but
Fitz-Edward, with more presence of mind, was directing two of Mr.
Stafford's horses to be saddled, with which he soon overtook Delamere;
and proceeding together to the town, they got into a post-chaise, and
went as expeditiously as four horses could take them, towards London.

Equally impetuous in all his feelings, his grief at the supposed
misfortune was as violent as it could have been had he been sure that
the worst had already happened. He now remembered, with infinite
self-reproach, how much uneasiness and distress he had occasioned to
Lady Montreville since he left her in November at Audley-Hall without
taking leave--and recollecting all her tenderness and affection for him
from the earliest dawn of his memory; her solicitude in his sickness,
when she had attended him herself and given up her rest and health to
contribute to his; her partial fondness, which saw merit even in his
errors; her perpetual and ardent anxiety for what she believed would
secure his happiness--he set in opposition to it his own neglect,
impatience, and disobedience; and called himself an unnatural and
ungrateful monster.

Fitz-Edward could hardly restrain his extravagant ravings during the
journey; which having performed as expeditiously as possible, they
arrived in Berkley-square; where, when the porter opened the door to
them, Delamere had not courage to ask how his mother did; but on
Fitz-Edward's enquiry, the porter told them she was alive, and not
worse.

Relieved by this account, Delamere sent to his father to know if he
might wait upon him.

His Lordship answered--"That he would only see Colonel Fitz-Edward; but
that Delamere might come in, to wait 'till his mother's physicians
arrived."

Lord Montreville was indeed so irritated against Delamere by all the
trouble and anxiety he had suffered on his account, that he determined
to shew his resentment; and in this resolution he was encouraged by Sir
Richard Crofts, who represented to him that his mother's danger, and his
father's displeasure, might together work upon his mind, and induce him
to renounce an attachment which occasioned to them both so much
unhappiness.

It was in this hope that his Lordship refused to see his son; and while
Fitz-Edward went to him, Delamere was shewn into another room, where his
youngest sister immediately came to him.

She received him with rapture mingled with tears; and related to him the
nature of his mother's illness, which had seized her two days before, on
her unfortunately taking up a newspaper from the breakfast-table, where
it was very confidently said that he was mortally wounded in a duel with
a person named Elkerton, of Portland-Place. That Lord Montreville had
luckily had a letter from Fitz-Edward the day before, (whom he had
forgiven the part he took in regard to Emmeline on no other condition
than that he should go down to him, and give his Lordship an account of
his conduct) and that therefore he was less alarmed, tho' very much
hurried by the paragraph.

He had, however, gone to Elkerton's house, where he found him very
composedly receiving the enquiries of his friends, and where he insisted
on hearing exactly what had happened.

His Lordship immediately returned to his wife; but the convulsions had
arisen to so alarming an height, that she was no longer capable of
hearing him; and she had ever since continued to have, at very short
intervals, such dreadful fits, as had entirely contracted her left side,
and left very little hope of her recovery.

Delamere was extremely shocked at this account; and after waiting some
time, Fitz-Edward came to him, and told him that his father was
extremely angry, and absolutely refused to see him or hear his apology,
unless he would first give his honour that if Lady Montreville should
survive the illness his indiscreet rashness had brought upon her, he
would, as soon as she was out of danger, go abroad, and remain there
till he should obtain forgiveness for his past errors and leave to
return.

The heart of Delamere was accessible only by the avenues of affection
and kindness; compulsion and threats only made him more resolutely
persist in any favourite project. Sir Richard Crofts therefore, who had
advised this measure, shewed but little knowledge of his temper, and
never was more mistaken in his politics.

Delamere no sooner heard the message, than he knew with whom it
originated; and full of indignation at finding his father governed by a
man for whom he felt only aversion and contempt, he answered, with great
asperity--'That he came thither not to solicit any favour, but to see
his mother. That he would not be dictated to by the Crofts; but would
remain in town 'till he knew whether his mother desired to see him; and
be ready to wait on his father when he would vouchsafe to treat him as
his son.'

He then shook hands with Fitz-Edward, kissed his sister, and walked out
of the house, in spite of their united endeavours to detain him. All
they could obtain of him was his consent to go to Fitz-Edward's
lodgings, as he had none of his own ready; from whence he sent
constantly every hour to enquire after Lady Montreville.



