

They found Lady Adelina in better spirits in the evening than they had
hoped for--She seemed to have been arguing herself into the composure
necessary to go on with her story.

       *       *       *       *       *

'As you have some acquaintance with George Fitz-Edward, I need not
describe his person or his manner; nor how decided a contrast they must
form with those of such a man as him to whom I was unhappily united.
This contrast, in spite of all my endeavours, was perpetually before my
eyes--I thought Fitz-Edward, who was agreeable as his brother, had a
heart as good; and _my_ heart involuntarily made the comparison between
what I was, and what I might have been, if my fate had reserved me for
Fitz-Edward.

'We embarked--It was about the autumnal equinox; and before we had
sailed two leagues, the wind suddenly changing, blew from the opposite
quarter, and then from every quarter by turns. As I was always subject
to sickness in the cabin, I had lain down on the deck, on a piece of
sail-cloth, and wrapped in my _pelisse_; and Fitz-Edward sat by me. But
when the wind grew so violent that it was necessary every moment to
shift the sails, I, who was totally insensible, was in the way of the
sailors. Fitz-Edward carried me down in his arms; and having often heard
me express an abhorrence to the close beds in the cabin, by the help of
my own maid he accommodated me with one on the floor; where he continued
to watch over me, without attending to his own danger, tho' he heard the
master of the pacquet express his apprehensions that we should be driven
back on the bar, and beat to pieces.

'Trelawny, in whom self-preservation was generally alive, whatever
became of his other feelings, had passed so jovial an evening before he
departed, that he was perfectly unconscious of his own danger. After
struggling some hours to return into the bay, it was with difficulty
accomplished about five in the morning. Fitz-Edward, with the tenderest
solicitude, saw me safe on shore, whither Trelawny was also brought. But
far from being rejoiced at our narrow escape, he cursed his ill luck,
which he said had raised this confounded storm only to prevent his
returning in time to see Clytemnestra got into proper order for the
October meeting.

'I was so ill the next day, thro' the fear and fatigue I had undergone,
that I was absolutely unable to go on board. But nothing that related to
me could detain Trelawny, who embarked again as soon as the pacquet was
refitted, and after some grumbling at my being too ill to go, left me to
follow him by the next conveyance, and recommended me with great
coolness to the care of Fitz-Edward.

'We staid only two days after him. Fitz-Edward, as well during the
passage as on our journey to London, behaved to me with the tenderness
of a brother; and I fancied my partiality concealed from him, because I
tried to conceal it. If he saw it, he shewed no disposition to take
advantage of it, and I therefore thought I might fearlessly indulge it.

'When I arrived at my house in town, I found that Trelawny was absent,
and had left a letter for me desiring me to go down to a house he had
not long before purchased in Hampshire, as a hunting seat. Without
enquiring his reasons, I obeyed him. I took a melancholy leave of
Fitz-Edward, and went into Hampshire; where, as Trelawny was not there,
I betook myself to my books, and I fear to thinking too much of
Fitz-Edward.

'After I had been there about a fortnight, I was surprized by a visit
from the object of my indiscreet contemplations. He looked distressed
and unhappy; and his first conversation seemed to be preparing me for
some ill news. I was dreadfully alarmed, and enquired eagerly for my
sister?--her husband?--her children?--

'"I hope, and believe they are well," answered he. "I have letters of a
very late date from my brother."

'"Oh God!" cried I, in an agony (for his countenance still assured me
something very bad had happened) "Lord Westhaven--my brother, my dear
brother!"--

'"Is well too, I hope--at least I assure you I know nothing to the
contrary."

'"Is it news from Jamaica then? Has there been an engagement. There has,
I know, and my brother William is killed."

'"No, upon my honour," replied Fitz-Edward, "had Godolphin been killed,
I, who love him better than any man breathing, could not have brought
the intelligence--But my dear Lady Adelina, are there then no other
misfortunes but those which arise from the death of friends?"

'"None," answered I, "but what I could very well bear. Tell me,
therefore, I conjure you tell me, and keep me no longer in suspence--I
can hear any thing since I have nothing to apprehend for the lives of
those I love."

'"Well then," answered he, "I will tell you.--I fear things are very bad
with Mr. Trelawny. It is said that all the estate not entailed, is
already gone; and that he has even sold his life interest in the rest.
All his effects at the town house are seized; and I am afraid the same
thing will in a few hours happen here. I came therefore, lovely Lady
Adelina, to intreat you to put yourself under my protection, and to quit
this house, where it will soon be so improper for you to remain."

'I enquired after the unhappy Trelawny? He told me he had left him
intoxicated at a gaming house in St. James's street; that he had told
him he was coming down to me, to which he had consented, tho'
Fitz-Edward said he much doubted whether he knew what he was saying.

'Fitz-Edward then advised me to pack up every thing I wished to
preserve, and immediately to depart; for he feared that persons were
already on the road to seize the furniture and effects in execution.

'"Gracious heaven!" cried I, "what can I do?--Whither can I go!"

'"Trust yourself with me," cried Fitz-Edward--"dear, injured Lady
Adelina."

'"Let me rather," answered I, "go down to Trelawny Park."

'"Alas!" said he, "the same ruin will there overtake you. Be assured Mr.
Trelawny's creditors will equally attach his property there. You know
too, that by the sale of his boroughs he has lost his seat in
parliament, and that therefore his person will not be safe. He must
himself go abroad."

'Doubting, and uncertain what I ought to do, I could determine on
nothing. Fitz-Edward proposed my going to Mr. Percival's, who had
married one of his sisters. They are at Bath, said he; but the house and
servants are at my disposal, and it is only five and twenty miles from
hence. Hardly knowing what I did, I consented to this proposal; and
taking my jewels and some valuable plate with me, I set out in a post
chaise with Fitz-Edward, leaving my maid to follow me the next day, and
give me an account whether our fears were verified.

'They were but too well founded. Four hours after I had left the house,
the sheriff's officers entered it--Information which encreased my
uneasiness for the fate of the unfortunate Trelawny; in hopes of
alleviating whose miseries I would myself have gone to London, but
Fitz-Edward would not suffer me. He said it was more than probable that
my husband was already in France; that if he was yet in England, he had
no house in which to receive me, and would feel more embarrassed than
relieved by my presence. But as I continued to express great uneasiness
to know what was become of him, he offered to go to London and bring me
some certain intelligence.

'At the end of a week, which appeared insupportably long, he returned,
and told me that with some difficulty he had discovered my unhappy
husband at the house of one of his friends, where he was concealed, and
where he had lost at picquet more than half the ready money he could
command. That with some difficulty he had convinced him of the danger as
well as folly of remaining in such a place; and had accompanied him to
Dover, whence he had seen him sail for France.

'I told Fitz-Edward that I would instantly give up as much of my
settlement as would enable Trelawny to live in affluence, till his
affairs could be arranged; but he protested that he would not suffer me
to take any measure of that sort, till I had the advice of _his_
brother: or, till one of my own returned to England.

'"Do you know," said he, at the end of this conversation--"Do you know,
Lady Adelina, that I envy Trelawny his misfortunes, since they excite
such generous pity.--Good God! of what tenderness, of what affection
would not such a heart be capable, if"----

'Fitz-Edward had seldom hazarded an observation of this sort, tho' his
eyes had told me a thousand times that he internally made them. He could
convey into half a sentence more than others could express by the most
elaborate speeches. Alas! I listened to him with too much pleasure; for
my treacherous heart had already said more than his insidious eloquence.

'I wrote to Lord Clancarryl, entreating him to come over. He assured me
he would do so, the moment he could leave my sister, who was very near
her time; but that in the interim his brother George would obey all my
commands, and render me every service he could himself do if present.

'Thrown, therefore, wholly into the power of Fitz-Edward; loving him but
too well; and seeing him every hour busied in serving me--I will not
accuse him of art; I had myself too little to hide from him the fatal
secret of my heart; I could not summon resolution to fly from him, till
my error was irretrievable--till I found myself made compleatly
miserable by the consciousness of guilt.

'After remaining there about a fortnight, I left the house of Mr.
Percival, and took a small lodging in the neighbourhood of
Cavendish-square. Fitz-Edward saw me every day.--I met him indeed with
tears and confusion; but if any accident prevented his coming, or if he
even absented himself at my own request, the anguish I felt till I again
saw him convinced me that it was no longer in my power to live without
him.

'Trelawny had given me no directions for my conduct; nor had he even
written to me, 'till he had occasion for money. He then desired me to
send him five hundred guineas--a sum I had no immediate means of
raising, but by selling some of my jewels. This I would immediately have
done; but Fitz-Edward, who would not hear of it, brought me the money in
a few hours, and undertook to remit it, together with a letter from me,
to the unfortunate man for whom it was designed.

'He tried too--ah, how vainly!--to persuade me, that in acting thus I
had done more than my duty to such an husband. His sophistry, aided by
my own wishes to believe him, could not quiet the incessant reproaches
with which my conscience pursued me--I remembered my father's dying
injunctions, I remembered the inflexible notions of honour inherited by
both my brothers, and I trembled at the severe account to which I might
be called. I could now no longer flatter myself that my error would be
concealed, since of its consequences I could not doubt; and while I
suffered all the terrors of remorse and apprehension, Lord Clancarryl
came over.

'In order to take measures towards settling Trelawny's affairs, it was
necessary to send for his sister, who had a bond for five thousand
pounds, which claim was prior to every other. This woman, whom it was
extremely disagreeable to me to meet, lamented with vulgar clamour her
brother's misfortunes; which she said could never have happened if he
had not been so unlucky as to get quality notions into his head. I know
not what at first raised her suspicions; but I saw that she very
narrowly observed Fitz-Edward; and sneeringly said that it was _very
lucky_ indeed for me to have such a friend, and _quite kind_ in the
colonel to take so much trouble. She made herself thoroughly acquainted
with all that related to her brother, from the time of our parting in
Ireland; and I found that she had attempted to bribe my servant to give
her an account of my conduct; in which tho' she had failed of success,
she had found that Fitz-Edward had been constantly with me. His
attendance was indeed less remarkable when Lord Clancarryl, his brother,
was also present; but Mrs. Bancraft, determined to believe ill of me,
suffered not this circumstance to have any weight, and hinted her
suspicions of our attachment in terms so little guarded, that it was
with the utmost difficulty I could prevail on Fitz-Edward not to resent
her impertinence.

'Lord Clancarryl despised this vulgar and disgusting woman too much to
attend to the inuendos he heard; and far from suspecting my unhappy
weakness, he continued to lay me under new obligations to Fitz-Edward by
employing him almost incessantly in the arrangement of Trelawny's
affairs.

'On looking over the will of that relation, who had bequeathed to Mr.
Trelawny the great fortune he had possessed, I discovered the reason of
Mrs. Bancraft's attentive curiosity in regard to me--if he died without
heirs, above six thousand a year was to descend to her son, who was to
take the name. He had been now married above two years, and his bloated
and unhealthy appearance (the effect of excessive drinking) indicated
short life; and had made her for some time look forward to the
succession of the entailed estate as an event almost certain for her
son. This sufficiently explained her conduct, and encreased all my
apprehensions; for I found that avarice would stimulate malice into that
continued watchfulness which I could not now undergo without the loss of
my fame and my peace.

'All things being settled by Lord Clancarryl in the best manner he could
dispose them for Mr. Trelawny, his Lordship pressed me to go with him to
Ireland; but conscious that I should carry only disgrace and sorrow into
the happy and respectable family of my sister, I refused, under pretence
of waiting to hear again from Trelawny before I took any resolution as
to my future residence.

'His Lordship therefore left me, having obtained my promise to go over
to Lough Carryl in the spring. Fitz-Edward continued to see me almost
every day, attempting by the tenderest assiduity to soothe and
tranquillize my mind. But time, which alleviates all other evils, only
encreased mine; and they were now become almost insupportable. After
long deliberation, I saw no way to escape the disgrace which was about
to overwhelm me, but hiding myself from my own family and from all the
world. I determined to keep my retreat secret, even from Fitz-Edward
himself; and to punish myself for my fatal attachment by tearing myself
for ever from it's object. Could I have supported the contempt of the
world, to which it was evidently the interest of Mrs. Bancraft to expose
me, I could not bear the most distant idea of the danger to which the
life of Fitz-Edward would be liable from the resentment of my brothers.
That he might perish by the hand of Lord Westhaven or Captain Godolphin,
or that one of those dear brothers might fall by his, was a suggestion
so horrid, and yet so probable, that it was for ever before me; and I
hastened to fly into obscurity, in the hope, that if my error is
concealed till I am myself in the grave, my brothers may forgive me, and
not attempt to wash out the offence in the blood of the surviving
offender.

'To remain, and to die here unknown, is all I now dare to wish for. My
servant having formerly known the woman who inhabits this cottage,
contrived to have a few necessaries sent hither without observation; I
have made it worth the while of the people to be secret; and as they
know not my name, I had little apprehension of being discovered.

'I took no leave of Fitz-Edward; nor have I written to him since. I
lament the pain my sudden absence must give him; but am determined to
see him no more. Should my child live----'

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Adelina was now altogether unable to proceed, and fell into an
agony of distress which greatly affected her auditors. Mrs. Stafford and
Emmeline said every thing they could think of to console her, and soften
the horror she seemed to feel for her unhappy indiscretion. But she
listened in listless despondence to their discourse, and answered, that
to be reconciled to guilt, and habituated to disgrace, was to be sunk in
the last abyss of infamy.

They left her not, however, till they saw her rather more tranquil; and
till Mrs. Stafford had prevailed upon her to accept of some books, which
she hoped might amuse her mind, and detach it awhile from the sad
subject of it's mournful contemplations. These she promised to convey to
the cottage in a way that could create no suspicion. And relieved of her
own apprehensions, yet full of concern for the fair unhappy mourner (to
whom neither she or Emmeline had given the least intimation of
Fitz-Edward's frequent residence in that country,) they returned to
Woodfield, impressed with the most earnest solicitude to soften the
calamities they had just heard related, tho' to cure them was
impossible.


    END OF THE SECOND VOLUME




VOLUME III



