

Whenever Mrs. Stafford and Emmeline were afterwards alone, they could
think and speak of nothing but Lady Adelina. The misfortunes in which an
unhappy marriage had involved her, her friendless youth, her lovely
figure, the settled sorrow and deep regret that she seemed to feel for
the error into which her too great sensibility of heart had betrayed
her, engaged their tenderest pity, and made them both anxious to give
her all the consolation and assistance she was now capable of receiving.

When they considered the uncertainty of her remaining long concealed
where she was, and the probability that Fitz-Edward himself might
discover her, they saw the necessity of her removal from Woodbury
Forest. But it was a proposal they could not yet make--nor had they yet
recollected any place where she might be more secure.

Emmeline, who felt herself particularly interested by her misfortunes,
and who was more pleased with her conversation the oftener she conversed
with her, seldom failed of seeing her every day: but Mrs. Stafford, more
apprehensive of observation, could not so frequently visit her; and the
precaution of both redoubled, when Mrs. Ashwood, Miss Galton, and the
two Miss Ashwood's, arrived at Woodfield, where they declared an
intention of staying the months of June and July.

Thither also, soon after, came the younger Mr. Crofts, who had made an
acquaintance with Mr. Stafford in London with the hope of obtaining an
invitation, which he eagerly accepted.

Sir Richard Crofts, in the ambition of making a family, had determined
to give every advantage to his eldest son, which might authorise him to
look up to those alliances that would, he hoped, make his own obscurity
forgotten. From the first dawn of his fortune, he had considered Mr.
Crofts as it's general heir; and had very plainly told his younger son,
that a place under government, which he had procured for him, of about
three hundred a year, must be his only dependance; till he should
possess two thousand pounds, all the provision he intended making for
him at his death--as he meant not to diminish, by a more equal division,
the patrimony of his brother. He recommended to him therefore to remedy
this deficiency of fortune, by looking out for an affluent wife.

Nature had not eminently qualified him for success in such a project;
for his person was short, thick, and ill made, and his face composed of
large broad features, two dim grey eyes, and a complexion of a dull
sallow white. A vain attempt to look like a gentleman, served only to
render the meanness of his figure more remarkable; and the qualities of
his heart and understanding were but little calculated to make his
personal imperfections forgotten. His heart was selfish, narrow,
unfeeling, and at once mean and proud; his understanding beneath
mediocrity; and his conversation consisted of quaint scraps of something
that he supposed was wit, or at least very like it. And even such
attempts to be entertaining, poor as they were, he retailed from the
office where he passed the greatest part of his time, and for a
subaltern employment in which, his education had been barely such as
fitted him. But ignorant as he was, and devoid of every estimable
accomplishment, he had an infinite deal of that inferior kind of policy
called cunning; and being accustomed to consider his establishment as
depending wholly on himself, he had acquired a habit of sacrificing
every sentiment and every passion to that one purpose; and would adopt
the opinions, and submit to the caprices of others, whenever he thought
they could promote it. He had learned the obsequious attention, the
indefatigable industry, the humble adulation which is necessary for the
under departments of political business: and while such acquisitions
gave him hopes of rising in that line, they failed not to contribute to
his success in another. He would walk from the extremity of Westminster
to Wapping, to smuggle a set of china or of quadrille boxes, for the
mother or aunt of an heiress; and would, with great temper, suffer the
old ladies to take advantage of him at cards, while he ogled the young
ones. Which, together with his being always ready to perform for them
petty services, and to flatter them without scruple, had obtained for
him the character of 'one of the best creatures breathing.' But
whatever favour these various recommendations obtained for him for a
time, from the elderly ladies, he lost his ground when his views were
discovered; and tho' he had received what he fancied encouragement from
two or three young women of fortune on their first emerging from the
nursery, yet they had no sooner acquired an handsomer or richer lover,
than 'the best creature breathing' was discarded.

He was not however discouraged; and meeting with Mrs. Ashwood at a rout
at Lady Montreville's, he was told by Miss Delamere, who was extremely
diverted with her airs of elegance, that she was a rich widow who wanted
a husband. He enquired into the circumstances of her fortune; and being
assured she possessed such an income as would make him easy, he thought
some little advantage she had over him in point of age no diminution of
her attractions, and found it convenient to fall immediately in love.
She listened to him with complaisance; and soon discovered 'that he was
not so plain as at first he appeared to be'--soon afterwards, 'that he
was rather handsome, and vastly sensible and agreeable.' After which, he
made a rapid progress in her heart; and it was concerted between them
that he should follow her to Woodfield.

Emmeline and Mrs. Stafford were wearied to death with the party. But the
former forbore to complain, and the latter was forced to submit, and to
smile, while anguish was frequently at her heart.

Mrs. Ashwood talked of nothing but fashionable parties and fashionable
people, to whom her acquaintance with Lord Montreville's family had
introduced her; and she now seldom deigned to name an untitled
acquaintance--while Crofts hung on her long narratives with affected
admiration; and the two elder of her three daughters, who were all in
training to be beauties, aped their mother in vanity and impertinence.

The eldest Miss Ashwood, now about fourteen, was an insupportable
torment to Emmeline, as she had taken it into her head to form, with
her, a sentimental friendship. She had learned all the cant of sentiment
from novels; and her mama's lovers had extremely edified her in teaching
her to express it. She talked perpetually of delicate embarrassments and
exquisite sensibilities, and had probably a lover, as she extremely
wanted a confidant; a post which Emmeline with some difficulty
declined.--Of 'the sweet novels' she had read, she just understood as
much as made her long to become the heroine of such an history herself,
and she wanted somebody to listen to her hopes of being so. But Emmeline
shrunk from her advances, and repaid her fondness with general and cool
civility; tho' Mrs. Ashwood, who loved rather to listen to Crofts than
to attend to her daughters, continually promoted the intimacy, in hopes
that she would take them off her own hands, and allow them to be the
companions of her walks.

This, Emmeline was obliged studiously to evade, as such companions would
entirely have prevented her seeing Lady Adelina; and by repeated excuses
she not only irritated the curiosity of Mrs. Ashwood and Miss Galton,
but gave the former an additional cause of dislike to that which she had
already conceived; inasmuch as she was younger, handsomer, and more
admired than herself.

Emmeline received frequent letters from Delamere, as warm and passionate
as his personal professions. He told her, that as his mother's health
was greatly amended, he intended soon to visit those parts of France
with which he was yet unacquainted; and should pass some time in the
Northern Provinces, from whence he entreated her to allow him to come
only for a few days to England to see her--an indulgence which he said
would enable him to bear with more tranquillity the remaining months of
his exile.

Tho' now accustomed to consider him as her husband, Emmeline resolutely
refused to consent to this breach of his engagement to his father. She
had lately seen in her friends, Mrs. Stafford and Lady Adelina, two
melancholy instances of the frequent unhappiness of very early
marriages; and she had no inclination to hazard her own happiness in
hopes of proving an exception. She wished, therefore, rather to delay
her union with Delamere two or three years; but to him she never dared
hint at such a delay. A clandestine interview it was, however, in her
power to decline; and she answered his request by entreating him not to
think of such a journey; and represented to him that he could not expect
Lord Montreville would finally adhere to _his_ promises, if he himself
was careless of fulfilling the conditions on which his Lordship had
insisted. Having thus, as she supposed, prevented Delamere from
offending his father, and without any immediate uneasiness on her own
account, she gave up her mind to the solicitude she could not help
feeling for Lady Adelina. This occupied almost all her time when she
was alone; and gave her, when in company, an air of absence and reserve.

Tho' Mrs. Ashwood so much encouraged the attention of James Crofts, she
had not forgotten Fitz-Edward, whom she had vainly sought at Lady
Montreville's, in hopes of renewing an acquaintance which had in it's
commencement offered her so much satisfaction. Fitz-Edward had been
amused with her absurdity at the moment, but had never thought of her
afterwards; nor would he then have bestowed so much time on a woman to
him entirely indifferent, had not he been thrown in her way by his
desire to befriend Delamere with Emmeline, on one of those days when
Lady Adelina insisted on his leaving her, to avoid the appearance of his
passing with her all his time. Happy in successful love, his gaiety then
knew no bounds; and his agreeable flattery, his lively conversation, his
fashionable manners, and his handsome person, had not since been absent
from the memory of Mrs. Ashwood. His being sometimes at the house he had
borrowed of Delamere, near Woodfield, was one of the principal
inducements to her to go thither. She indulged sanguine hopes of
securing such a conquest; and evaded giving to Crofts a positive answer,
till she had made another essay on the heart of the Colonel.

He came, however, so seldom to Woodfield, that Mrs. Stafford had seen
him there only once since her meeting Lady Adelina; and then he appeared
to be under encreased dejection, for which she knew now, how to account.

Emmeline had given Mrs. Stafford so indifferent an account of Lady
Adelina one evening, that she determined the next morning to see her.
She therefore went immediately after breakfast, on pretence of visiting
a poor family who had applied to her for assistance; when as Mrs.
Ashwood, Miss Galton and Emmeline, were sitting together, Colonel
Fitz-Edward was announced.

He came down to Tylehurst only the evening before; and not knowing there
was company at Woodfield, rode over to pass an hour with the two
friends, to whom he had frequently been tempted to communicate the
source of his melancholy.

Whether it was owing to the consciousness of Lady Adelina's mournful
story that arose in the mind of Emmeline, or whether seeing Fitz-Edward
again in company with Mrs. Ashwood renewed the memory of what had
befallen her when they last met, she blushed deeply the moment she
beheld him, and arose from her chair in confusion; then sat down and
took out her work, which she had hastily put up; and trying to recover
herself, grew still more confused, and trembled and blushed again.

Mrs. Ashwood was in the mean time overwhelming Fitz-Edward with
compliments and kind looks, which he answered with the distant civility
of a slight acquaintance; and taking a chair close to Emmeline, enquired
if she was not well?

She answered that she was perfectly well; and attempted to introduce
general conversation. But Fitz-Edward was attentive only to her; and
Mrs. Ashwood, extremely piqued at his distant manner, meditated an
excuse to get Emmeline out of the room, in hopes of obtaining more
notice.

Fitz-Edward, however, having talked apart with Miss Mowbray a short
time, arose and took leave, having by his manner convinced Mrs. Ashwood
of what she reluctantly believed, that some later attachment had
obliterated the impression she had made at their first interview.

'I never saw such a figure in my life,' cried she, 'as Mr. Fitz-Edward.
Mercy on me!--he is grown _so_ thin, and _so_ sallow!'

'And _so_ stupid,'interrupted Miss Galton. 'He is in love I fancy.'

Emmeline blushed again; and Mrs. Ashwood casting a malicious look at
her, said--'Oh! yes--he doubtless is in love. To men of his gay turn you
know it makes no difference, whether a person be actually married or
_engaged_.'

Emmeline, uncertain of the meaning of this sarcasm, and unwilling to be
provoked to make a tart reply, which she felt herself ready to do, put
up her work and left the room.

While she went in search of Mrs. Stafford, to enquire after Lady
Adelina, and to relate the conversation that had passed between her and
Fitz-Edward, Mrs. Ashwood and Miss Galton were indulging their natural
malignity. Tho' well apprized of Emmeline's engagement to Delamere, yet
they hesitated not to impute her confusion, and Fitz-Edward's behaviour,
to a passion between them. They believed, that while her elopement with
Delamere had beyond retreat entangled her with him, and while his
fortune and future title tempted her to marry him, her heart was in
possession of Fitz-Edward; and that Delamere was the dupe of his
mistress and his friend.

This idea, which could not have occurred to a woman who was not herself
capable of all the perfidy it implied, grew immediately familiar with
the imagination of Mrs. Ashwood, and embittered the sense of her own
disappointment.

Miss Galton, who hated Emmeline more if possible than Mrs. Ashwood,
irritated her suspicions by remarks of her own. She observed 'that it
was very extraordinary Miss Mowbray should walk out so early in a
morning, and so studiously avoid taking any body with her--and that
unless she had appointments to which she desired no witness, it was very
singular she should chuse to ramble about by herself.'

From these observations, and her evident confusion on seeing him, they
concluded that she had daily assignations with Fitz-Edward. They agreed,
that it would be no more than common justice to inform Mr. Delamere of
their discovery; and this they determined to do as soon as they had
certain proofs to produce, with which they concluded a very little
trouble and attention would furnish them.

James Crofts, whose success was now indisputable, since of the handsome
Colonel there were no hopes, was let into the secret of their
suspicions; and readily undertook to assist in detecting the intrigue,
for which he assured them he had particular talents. While, therefore,
Mrs. Ashwood, Miss Galton, and James Crofts, were preparing to undermine
the peace and character of the innocent, ingenuous Emmeline, she and
Mrs. Stafford were meditating how to be useful to the unhappy Lady
Adelina. They became every day more interested and more apprehensive for
the fate of that devoted young woman, whose health seemed to be such as
made it very improbable she should survive the birth of her child. Her
spirits, too, were so depressed, that they could not prevail on her to
think of her own safety, or to allow them to make any overtures to her
family; but, in calm and hopeless languor, she seemed resigned to the
horrors of her destiny, and determined to die unlamented and unknown.

Her elder brother, Lord Westhaven, had returned from abroad almost
immediately after her concealment. His enquiries on his first arrival in
England had only informed him of the embarrassment of Trelawny's
affairs, and the inconvenience to which his sister had consequently been
exposed; and that after staying some time in England, to settle things
as well as she could, she had disappeared, and every body believed was
gone to her husband. His Lordship's acquaintance and marriage with
Augusta Delamere, almost immediately succeeded; but while it was
depending, he was astonished to hear from Lord and Lady Clancarryl that
Lady Adelina had never written to them before her departure. He went in
search of Fitz-Edward; but could never meet him at home or obtain from
his servants any direction where to find him. Fitz-Edward, indeed,
purposely avoided him, and had left no address at his lodgings in town,
or at Tylehurst.

Lord Westhaven then wrote to Trelawny, but obtained no answer; and
growing daily more alarmed at the uncertainty he was in about Lady
Adelina, he determined to go, as soon as he was married, to Switzerland;
being persuaded that tho' some accident had prevented his receiving her
letters, she had found an asylum there, amongst his mother's relations.

Fitz-Edward, with anxiety even more poignant, had sought her with as
little success. After the morning when she discharged her lodgings, and
left them in an hackney coach with her maid, he could never, with all
his unwearied researches, discover any traces of her.

He knew she was not gone to Trelawny; and dreading every thing from her
determined sorrow, he passed his whole time between painful and
fruitless conjectures, and the tormenting apprehension of hearing of
some fatal event. Incessantly reproaching himself for being the betrayer
of his trust, and the ruin of a lovely and amiable woman, he gave
himself up to regret and despondence. The gay Fitz-Edward, so lately the
envy and admiration of the fashionable world, was lost to society, his
friends, and himself.

He passed much of his time at Tylehurst; because he could there indulge,
without interruption, his melancholy reflections, and only saw Mrs.
Stafford and Emmeline, in whose soft and sensible conversation he found
a transient alleviation of his sorrow--sorrow which now grew too severe
to be longer concealed, and which he resolved to take the earliest
opportunity of acknowledging, in hopes of engaging the pity of his fair
friends--perhaps their assistance in discovering the unhappy fugitive
who caused it.

From Lady Adelina, they had most carefully concealed, that his residence
was so near the obscure abode she had chosen. Fatal as he had been to
her peace, and conscientiously as she had abstained from naming him
after their first conversation, they knew that she still fondly loved
him, and that her fears for his safety had assisted her sense of
rectitude when she determined to tear herself from him. But were she
again to meet him, they feared she would either relapse into her former
fatal affection, or conquer it by an effort, which in her precarious
state of health might prove immediately fatal.

The request which Fitz-Edward had made to Emmeline, that he might be
allowed to see her and Mrs. Stafford together, without any other person
being present, they both wished to evade; dreading least they should by
their countenances betray the knowledge they had of his unhappy story,
and the interest they took in it's catastrophe.

They hoped, therefore, to escape hearing his confession till Lady
Adelina should be removed--and to remove her became indispensibly
necessary, as Emmeline was convinced she was watched in her visits to
the cottage.

Twice she had met James Crofts within half a quarter of a mile of the
cottage; and at another time discovered, just as she was about to enter
it, that the Miss Ashwoods had followed her almost to the door; which
she therefore forbore to enter. These circumstances made both her and
Mrs. Stafford solicitous to have Lady Adelina placed in greater
security; and, added to Emmeline's uneasiness for her, was the
unpleasant situation in which she found herself.

Observed with malicious vigilance by Mrs. Ashwood, James Crofts, Miss
Galton, and the two Misses, she felt as awkward as if she really had
some secret of her own to hide; and with all the purity and even heroism
of virtue, learned the uneasy sensation which ever attends mystery and
concealment. The hours which used to pass tranquilly and rationally with
Mrs. Stafford, were now dedicated to people whose conversation made her
no amends; and if she retired to her own room, it failed not to excite
sneers and suspicions. She saw Mrs. Stafford struggling with dejection
which she had no power to dissipate or relieve, and obliged to enter
into frequent parties of what is called pleasure, tho' to her it gave
only fatigue and disgust, to gratify Mrs. Ashwood, who hated all society
but a crowd. James Crofts, indeed, helped to keep her in good humour by
his excessive adulation; and chiefly by assuring her, that by any man of
the least taste, the baby face of Emmeline could be considered only as a
foil to her more mature charms, and that her fine dark eyes eclipsed all
the eyes in the world. He protested too against Emmeline for affecting
knowledge--'It is,' said he, 'a maxim of my father's--and my father is
no bad judge--that for a woman to affect literature is the most horrid
of all absurdities; and for a woman to know any thing of business, is
detestable!'

Mrs. Ashwood laid by her dictionary, determined for the future to spell
her own way without it.

Besides the powerful intervention of flattery, James Crofts had another
not less successful method of winning the lady's favour. He told her
that his brother, who had long cherished a passion in which he was at
length likely to be disappointed, was in that case determined never to
marry; that he was in an ill state of health; and if he died without
posterity, the estate and title of his father would descend to himself.

The elder Crofts, very desirous of seeing a brother established who
might otherwise be burthensome or inconvenient to him, suggested this
finesse; and secured it's belief by writing frequent and melancholy
accounts of his own ill health--an artifice by which he promoted at once
his brother's views and his own. He affected the valetudinarian so
happily, and complained so much of the ill effect that constant
application to business had on his constitution, that nobody doubted of
the reality of his sickness. He took care that Miss Delamere should
receive an account of it, which he knew she would consider as the
consequence of his despairing love; and when he had interested her
vanity and of course her compassion, he contrived to obtain leave of
absence for three months from the duties of his office, in order to go
abroad for the recovery of his health. He hastened to Barege; and soon
found means to re-establish himself in the favour of Miss Delamere; from
which, absence, and large draughts of flattery dispensed with French
adroitness, had a little displaced him. This stratagem put his brother
James on so fair a footing with the widow, that he thought her fortune
would be secured before she could discover it to be only a stratagem,
and that her lover was still likely to continue a younger brother.

James Crofts seeing the necessity of dispatch, became so importunate,
that Mrs. Ashwood, despairing of Fitz-Edward, and believing she might
not again meet with a man so near a title, for which she had a violent
inclination, was prevailed on to promise she would make him happy as
soon as she returned to her own house.

It was now the end of June; and Lady Adelina, whose situation grew very
critical, had at length yielded to the entreaties of her two friends,
and agreed to go wherever they thought she could obtain assistance and
concealment in the approaching hour.

Mrs. Stafford and Emmeline, after long and frequent reflections and
consultations on the subject, concluded that no situation would be so
proper as Bath. In a place resorted to by all sorts of people, less
enquiry is excited than in a provincial town, where strangers are
objects of curiosity to it's idle inhabitants. To Bath, therefore, it
was determined Lady Adelina should go. But when the time of her journey,
and her arrangements there, came to be discussed, she expressed so much
terror least she should be known, so much anguish at leaving those to
whose tender pity she was so greatly indebted, and such melancholy
conviction that she should not survive, that the sensible heart of
Emmeline could not behold without sharing her agonies; nor was Mrs.
Stafford less affected. When they returned home after this interview,
Emmeline was pursued by the image of the poor unhappy Adelina. But to
give, to the wretched, only barren sympathy, was not in her nature,
where more effectual relief was in her power. She thought, that if by
her presence she could alleviate the anguish, and soothe the sorrows of
the fair mourner, perhaps save her character and her life, and be the
means of restoring her to her family, she should perform an action
gratifying to her own heart, and acceptable to heaven. The more she
reflected on it, the more anxious she became to execute it--and she at
length named it to Mrs. Stafford.

Mrs. Stafford, tho' aware of the numberless objections which might have
been made to such a plan, could not resolve strenuously to oppose it.
She felt infinite compassion for Lady Adelina; but could herself do
little to assist her, as her time was not her own and her absence must
have been accounted for: but Emmeline was liable to no restraint; and
would not only be meritoriously employed in befriending the unhappy, but
would escape from the society at Woodfield, which became every day more
disagreeable to her. These considerations, particularly the benevolent
one of saving an unhappy young woman, over-balanced, in the mind of Mrs.
Stafford, the objection that might be made to her accompanying a person
under the unfortunate and discreditable circumstances of Lady Adelina;
and her heart, too expansive to be closed by the cold hand of prudery
against the sighs of weakness or misfortune, assured her that she was
right. She knew that Emmeline was of a character to pity, but not to
imitate, the erroneous conduct of her friend; and she believed that the
reputation of Lady Adelina Trelawny might be rescued from reproach,
without communicating any part of it's blemish to the spotless purity of
Emmeline Mowbray.



