

As soon as Emmeline had persuaded herself of the propriety of this plan
and obtained Mrs. Stafford's concurrence, she hinted her intentions to
Lady Adelina; who received the intimation with such transports of
gratitude and delight, that Emmeline, confirmed in her resolution, no
longer suffered a doubt of it's propriety to arise; and, with the
participation of Mrs. Stafford only, prepared for her journey, which was
to take place in ten days.

Mrs. Stafford also employed a person on whom she could rely, to receive
the money due to Lady Adelina from her husband's estate. But of this her
Ladyship demanded only half, leaving the rest for Trelawny. The attorney
in whose hands Trelawny's affairs were placed by Lord Westhaven, was
extremely anxious to discover, from the person employed by Mrs.
Stafford, from whence he obtained the order signed by Lady Adelina; and
obliged him to attend several days before he would pay it, in hopes, by
persuasions or artful questions, to draw the secret from him. He met, at
the attorney's chambers, an officer who had made of him the same
enquiry, and had followed him home, and since frequently importuned
him--intelligence, which convinced Mrs. Stafford that Lady Adelina must
soon be discovered, (as they concluded the officer was Fitz-Edward,) and
made both her and Emmeline hasten the day of her departure.

About a quarter of a mile from Woodfield, and at the extremity of the
lawn which surrounded it, was a copse in which the accumulated waters of
a trout stream formed a beautiful tho' not extensive piece of water,
shaded on every side by a natural wood. Mrs. Stafford, who had
particular pleasure in the place, had planted flowering shrubs and
caused walks to be cut through it; and on the edge of the water built a
seat of reeds and thatch, which was furnished with a table and a few
garden chairs. Thither Emmeline repaired whenever she could disengage
herself from company. Solitude was to her always a luxury; and
particularly desirable now, when her anxiety for Lady Adelina, and
preparations for their approaching departure, made her wish to avoid the
malicious observations of Mrs. Ashwood, the forward intrusion of her
daughters, and the inquisitive civilities of James Crofts. She had now
only one day to remain at Woodfield, before that fixed for their setting
out; and being altogether unwilling to encounter the fatigue of such an
engagement so immediately previous to her journey, she declined being of
the party to dine at the house of a neighbouring gentleman; who, on the
occasion of his son's coming of age, was to give a ball and _fete
champetre_ to a very large company.

Mrs. Ashwood, seeing Emmeline averse, took it into her head to press her
extremely to go with them; and finding she still refused, said--'it was
monstrous rude, and that she was sure no young person would decline
partaking such an entertainment if she had not some _very particular_
reason.'

Emmeline, teized and provoked out of her usual calmness, answered--'That
whatever might be her reasons, she was fortunately accountable to nobody
for them.'

Mrs. Ashwood, provoked in her turn, made some very rude replies, which
Emmeline, not to irritate her farther, left the room without answering;
and as soon as the carriages drove from the door, she dined alone, and
then desiring one of the servants to carry her harp into the
summer-house in the copse, she walked thither with her music books, and
soon lost the little chagrin which Mrs. Ashwood's ill-breeding had given
her.

Fitz-Edward, who arrived in the country the preceding evening, after
another fruitless search for Lady Adelina, walked over to Woodfield, in
hopes, as it was early in the afternoon, that he might obtain, in the
course of it, some conversation with Mrs. Stafford and Emmeline. On
arriving, he met the servant who had attended Emmeline to the copse, and
was by him directed thither. As he approached the seat, he heard her
singing a plaintive air, which seemed in unison with his heart. She
started at the sight of him--Mrs. Ashwood's suspicions immediately
occurred to her, and at the same moment the real motive which had made
him seek this interview. She blushed, and looked uneasy; but the
innocence and integrity of her heart presently restored her composure,
and when Fitz-Edward asked if she would allow him half an hour of her
time, she answered--'certainly.'

He sat down by her, dejectedly and in silence. She was about to put
aside her harp, but he desired her to repeat the air she was singing.

'It is sweetly soothing,' said he, 'and reminds me of happier days when
I first heard it; while you sing it, I may perhaps acquire resolution to
tell you what may oblige you to discard me from your acquaintance. It
does indeed require resolution to hazard such a misfortune.'

Emmeline, not knowing how to answer, immediately began the air. The
thoughts which agitated her bosom while she sung, made her voice yet
more tender and pathetic. She saw the eyes of Fitz-Edward fill with
tears; and as soon as she ceased he said--

'Tell me, Miss Mowbray--what does the man deserve, who being entrusted
with the confidence of a young and beautiful woman--beautiful, even as
Emmeline herself, and as highly accomplished--has betrayed the sacred
trust; and has been the occasion--oh God!--of what misery may I not have
been the occasion!

'Pardon me,' continued he--'I am afraid my despair frightens you--I will
endeavour to command myself.'

Emmeline found she could not escape hearing the story, and endeavoured
not to betray by her countenance that she already knew it.

Fitz-Edward went on--

'When first I knew you, I was a decided libertine. Yourself and Mrs.
Stafford, lovely as I thought you both, would have been equally the
object of my designs, if Delamere's passion for you, and the reserved
conduct of Mrs. Stafford, had not made me doubt succeeding with either.
But for your charming friend my heart long retained it's partiality; nor
would it ever have felt for her that pure and disinterested friendship
which is now in regard to her it's only sentiment, had not the object of
my present regret and anguish been thrown in my way.

'To you, Miss Mowbray, I scruple not to speak of this beloved and
lamented woman; tho' her name is sacred with me, and has never yet been
mentioned united with dishonour.

'The connection between our families first introduced me to her
acquaintance. In her person she was exquisitely lovely, and her manners
were as enchanting as her form. The sprightly gaiety of unsuspecting
inexperience, was, I thought, sometimes checked by an involuntary
sentiment of regret at the sacrifice she had made, by marrying a man
every way unworthy of her; except by that fortune to which she was
indifferent, and of which he was hastening to divest himself.

'I had never seen Mr. Trelawny; and knew him for some time only from
report. But when he came to Lough Carryl, my pity for her, encreased in
proportion to the envy and indignation with which I beheld the
insensible and intemperate husband--incapable of feeling for her, any
other sentiment, than what she might equally have inspired in the lowest
of mankind.

'Her unaffected simplicity; her gentle confidence in my protection
during a voyage in which her ill-assorted mate left her entirely to my
care; made me rather consider her as my sister than as an object of
seduction. I resolved to be the guardian rather than the betrayer of her
honour--and I long kept my resolution.'

Fitz-Edward then proceeded to relate the circumstances that attended the
ruin of Trelawny's fortune; and that Lady Adelina was left to struggle
with innumerable difficulties, unassisted but by himself, to whom Lord
Clancarryl had delegated the task of treating with Trelawny's sister and
creditors.

'Her gratitude,' continued he, 'for the little assistance I was able to
give her, was boundless; and as pity had already taught me to love her
with more ardour than her beauty only, captivating as it is, would have
inspired; gratitude led her too easily into tender sentiments for me. I
am not a presuming coxcomb; but she was infinitely too artless to
conceal her partiality; and neither her misfortunes, or her being the
sister of my friend Godolphin, protected her against the libertinism of
my principles.'

He went on to relate the deep melancholy that seized Lady Adelina; and
his own terror and remorse when he found her one morning gone from her
lodgings, where she had left no direction; and from her proceeding it
was evident she designed to conceal herself from his enquiries.

'God knows,' pursued he, 'what is now become of her!--perhaps, when most
in need of tenderness and attention, she is thrown destitute and
friendless among strangers, and will perish in indigence and obscurity.
Unused to encounter the slightest hardship, her delicate frame, and
still more sensible mind, will sink under those to which her situation
will expose her--perhaps I shall be doubly a murderer!'

He stopped, from inability to proceed--Emmeline, in tears, continued
silent.

Struggling to conquer his emotion and recover his voice, Fitz-Edward at
length continued--

'While I was suffering all the misery which my apprehension for her fate
inflicted, her younger brother, William Godolphin, returned from the
West Indies, where he has been three years stationed. I was the first
person he visited in town; but I was not at my lodgings there. Before I
returned from Tylehurst, he had informed himself of all the
circumstances of Trelawny's embarrassments, and his sister's absence. He
found letters from Lord Westhaven, and from my brother, Lord Clancarryl;
who knowing he would about that time return to England, conjured him to
assist in the attempt of discovering Lady Adelina; of whose motives for
concealing herself from her family they were entirely ignorant, while it
filled them with uneasiness and astonishment. As soon as I went back to
London, Godolphin, of whose arrival I was ignorant, came to me. He
embraced me, and thanked me for my friendship and attention to his
unfortunate Adelina--I think if he had held his sword to my heart it
would have hurt me less!

'He implored me to help his search after his lost sister, and again said
how greatly he was obliged to me--while I, conscious how little I
deserved his gratitude, felt like a coward and an assassin, and shrunk
from the manly confidence of my friend.

'Since our first meeting, I have seen him several times, and ever with
new anguish. I have loved Godolphin from my earliest remembrance; and
have known him from a boy to have the best heart and the noblest spirit
under heaven. Equally incapable of deserving or bearing dishonour,
Godolphin will behold me with contempt; which tho' I deserve, I cannot
endure. He must call me to an account; and the hope of perishing by his
hand is the only one I now cherish. Yet unable to shock him by divulging
the fatal secret, I have hitherto concealed it, and my concealment he
must impute to motives base, infamous, and pusillanimous. I can bear
such reflections no longer--I will go to town to-morrow, explain his
sister's situation to him, and let him take the only reparation I can
now make him.'

Emmeline, shuddering at this resolution, could not conceal how greatly
it affected her.

'Generous and lovely Miss Mowbray! pardon me for having thus moved your
gentle nature; and allow me, since I see you pity me, to request of you
and Mrs. Stafford a favour which will probably be the last trouble the
unhappy Fitz-Edward will give you.

'It may happen that Lady Adelina may hereafter be discovered--tho' I
know not how to hope it. But if your generous pity should interest you
in the fate of that unhappy, forlorn young woman, your's and Mrs.
Stafford's protection might yet perhaps save her; and such interposition
would be worthy of hearts like yours. As the event of a meeting between
me and Godolphin is uncertain, shall I entreat you, my lovely friend, to
take charge of this paper. It contains a will, by which the child of
Lady Adelina will be entitled to all I die possessed of. It is enough,
if the unfortunate infant survives, to place it above indigence. Lord
Clancarryl will not dispute the disposition of my fortune; and to your
care, and that of Mrs. Stafford, I have left it in trust, and I have
entreated you to befriend the poor little one, who will probably be an
orphan--but desolate and abandoned it will not be, if it's innocence and
unhappiness interest you to grant my request. Delamere will not object
to your goodness being so exerted; and you will not teach it, generous,
gentle as you are! to hold in abhorrence the memory of it's father. This
is all I can now do. Farewell! dearest Miss Mowbray!--Heaven give you
happiness, _ma douce amie!_ Farewell!'

These last words, in which Fitz-Edward repeated the name by which he was
accustomed to address Emmeline, quite overcame her. He was hastening
away, while, hardly able to speak, she yet made an effort to stop him.
The interview he was about to seek was what Lady Adelina so greatly
dreaded. Yet Emmeline dared not urge to him how fatal it would be to
her; she knew not what to say, least he should discover the secret with
which she was entrusted; but in breathless agitation caught his hand as
he turned to leave her, crying--

'Hear me, Fitz-Edward! One moment hear me! Do not go to meet Captain
Godolphin. I conjure, I implore you do not!'

She found it impossible to proceed. Her eyes were still eagerly fixed on
his face; she still held his hand; while he, supposing her extreme
emotion arose from the compassionate tenderness of her nature, found the
steadiness of his despair softened by the soothing voice of pity, and
throwing himself on his knees, he laid his head on one of the chairs,
and wept like a woman.

Emmeline, who now hoped to persuade him not to execute the resolution he
had formed, said--'I will take the paper you have given me, Fitz-Edward,
and will most religiously fulfil all your request in it to the utmost
extent of my power. But in return for my giving you this promise, I must
insist'----

At this moment James Crofts stood before them.

Emmeline, shocked and amazed at his appearance, roused Fitz-Edward by a
sudden exclamation.

He started up, and said fiercely to Crofts--'Well, Sir!--have you any
commands here?'

'Commands, Sir,' answered Crofts, somewhat alarmed by the tone in which
this question was put--'I have no commands to be sure Sir--but, but, I
came Sir, just to enquire after Miss Mowbray. I did not mean to
intrude.'

'Then, Sir,' returned the Colonel, 'I beg you will leave us.'

'Oh! certainly, Sir,' cried Crofts, trying to regain his courage and
assume an air of raillery--'certainly--I would not for the world
interrupt you. My business indeed is not at all material--only a
compliment to Miss Mowbray--your's,' added he sneeringly, 'is, I see, of
more consequence.'

'Look ye, Mr. Crofts,' sharply answered Fitz-Edward--'You are to make no
impertinent comments. Miss Mowbray is mistress of her actions. She is in
my particular protection on behalf of my friend Delamere, and I shall
consider the slightest failure of respect to her as an insult to me.
Sir, if you have nothing more to say you will be so good as to leave
us.'

There was something so hostile in the manner in which Fitz-Edward
delivered this speech, that James Crofts, more at home in the cabinet
than the field, thought he might as well avoid another injunction to
depart; and quietly submit to the present, rather than provoke farther
resentment from the formidable soldier. He therefore, looking most
cadaverously, made one of his jerking bows, and said, with something he
intended for a smile--

'Well, well, good folks, I'll leave you to your _tete a tete_, and
hasten back to my engagement. Every body regrets Miss Mowbray's absence
from the ball; and the partner that was provided for her is ready to
hang himself.'

An impatient look, darted from Fitz-Edward, stopped farther effusion of
impertinence, and he only added--'Servant! servant!' and walked away.

Fitz-Edward, then turning towards Emmeline, saw her pale and faint.

'Why, my dear Miss Mowbray, do you suffer this man's folly to affect
you? Your looks really terrify me!'

'Oh! he was sent on purpose,' cried Emmeline.--'Mrs. Ashwood has lately
often hinted to me, that whatever are my engagements to Delamere I was
much more partial to you. She has watched me for some time; and now, on
my refusing to accompany them to the ball, concluded I had an
appointment, and sent Crofts back to see.'

'If I thought so,' sternly answered Fitz-Edward, 'I would instantly
overtake him, and I believe I could oblige him to secresy.'

'No, for heaven's sake don't!' said Emmeline--'for heaven's sake do not
think of it! I care not what they conjecture--leave them to their
malice--Crofts is not worth your anger. But Fitz-Edward, let us return
to what we were talking of. Will you promise me to delay going to
London--to delay seeing Mr. Godolphin until--in short, will you give me
your honour to remain at Tylehurst a week, without taking any measures
to inform Godolphin of what you have told me. I will, at the end of that
time, either release you from your promise, or give you unanswerable
reasons why you should relinquish the design of meeting him at all.'

Fitz-Edward, however amazed at the earnestness she expressed to obtain
this promise, gave it. He had no suspicion of Emmeline's having any
knowledge of Lady Adelina; and accounted for the deep interest she
seemed to take in preventing an interview, by recollecting the universal
tenderness and humanity of her character. He assured her he would not
leave Tylehurst 'till the expiration of the time she had named. He
conjured her not to suffer any impertinence from Crofts on the subject
of their being seen together, but to awe him into silence by resentment.
Emmeline now desired him to leave her. But she still seemed under such
an hurry of spirits, that he insisted on being allowed to attend her to
the door of the house, where, renewing his thanks for the compassionate
attention she had afforded him, and entreating her to compose herself,
he left her.

Emmeline intending to go to her own room, went first into the drawing
room to deposit her music book. She had hardly done so, when she heard a
man's step, and turning, beheld Crofts open the door, which he
immediately shut after him.

'I thought, Sir,' said Emmeline, 'you had been gone back to your
company.'

'No, not yet, my fair Emmeline. I wanted first to beg your pardon for
having disturbed so snug a party. Ah! sly little prude--who would think
that you, who always seem so cold and so cruel, made an excuse only to
stay at home to meet Fitz-Edward? But it is not fair, little dear, that
all your kindness should be for him, while you will scarce give any
other body a civil look. Now I have met with you I swear I'll have a
kiss too.'

Emmeline, terrified to death at his approaching her with this speech,
flew to the bell, which she rang with so much violence that the rope
broke from the crank.

'Now,' cried Crofts, 'if nobody hears, you are more than ever in my
power.'

'Heaven forbid!' shrieked Emmeline, in an agony of fear. 'Let me go, Mr.
Crofts, this moment.'

She would have rushed towards the door but he stood with his arms
extended before it.

'You did not run thus--you did not scream thus, when Fitz-Edward, the
fortunate Fitz-Edward, was on his knees before you. Then, you could weep
and sigh too, and look so sweetly on him. But come--you see I know so
much that it will be your interest, little dear, to make me your
friend.'

'Rather let me apply to fiends and furies for friendship! hateful,
detestable wretch! by what right do you insult and detain me?'

'Oh! these theatricals are really very sublime!' cried he, seizing both
her hands, which he violently grasped.

She shrieked aloud, and fruitlessly struggled to break from him, when
the footsteps of somebody near the door obliged him to let her go. She
darted instantly away, and in the hall met one of the maids.

'Lord, Miss,' cried the servant, 'did you ring? I've been all over the
house to see what bell it was.'

Emmeline, without answering, flew to her own room. The maid followed
her: but desirous of being left alone, she assured the girl that nothing
was the matter; that she was merely tired by a long walk; and desiring
a glass of water, tried to compose and recollect herself; while Crofts
unobserved returned to the house where the _fete_ was given time enough
to dress and dance with Mrs. Ashwood.

It was at her desire, that immediately after dinner Crofts had left the
company under pretence of executing a commission with which she easily
furnished him; but his real orders were to discover the motives of
Emmeline's refusal to be of the party. This he executed beyond his
expectation. It was no longer to be doubted that very good intelligence
subsisted between Emmeline and Fitz-Edward, since he had been found on
his knees before her; while she, earnestly yet kindly speaking, hung
over him with tears in her eyes. Knowing that Emmeline was absolutely
engaged to Delamere, he was persuaded that Fitz-Edward was master of her
heart; and that the tears and emotion to which he had been witness, were
occasioned by the impossibility of her giving him her hand. He knew
Fitz-Edward's character too well to suppose he could be insensible of
the lady's kindness; and possessing himself a mind gross and depraved,
he did not hesitate to believe all the ill his own base and illiberal
spirit suggested.

Tho', interested hypocrite as he was, he made every other passion
subservient to the gratification of his avarice, Crofts had not coldly
beheld the youth and beauty of Emmeline; he had, however, carefully
forborne to shew that he admired her, and would probably never have
betrayed what must ruin him for ever with Mrs. Ashwood, had not the
conviction of her partiality to Fitz-Edward inspired him with the
infamous hope of frightening her into some kindness for himself, by
threatening to betray her stolen interview with her supposed lover.

The scorn and horror with which Emmeline repulsed him served only to
mortify his self love, and provoke his hatred towards her and the man
whom he believed she favoured; and with the inveterate and cowardly
malignity of which his heart was particularly susceptible, he determined
to do all in his power to ruin them both.



