

Such was the horror and detestation which Emmeline felt for Crofts, that
she could not bear the thoughts of seeing him again. But as she feared
Mrs. Stafford might resent his behaviour, and by that means embroil
herself with the vain and insolent Mrs. Ashwood, with whom she knew
Stafford was obliged to keep on a fair footing, she determined to say as
little as she could of his impertinence to Mrs. Stafford, but to
withdraw from the house without again exposing herself to meet him. As
soon as she saw her the next morning, she related all that had passed
between Fitz-Edward and herself; and after a long consultation they
agreed that to prevent his seeing Godolphin was absolutely necessary;
and that no other means of doing so offered, but Mrs. Stafford's
relating to him the real circumstances and situation of Lady Adelina, as
soon as she could be removed from her present abode and precautions
taken to prevent his discovering her. This, Mrs. Stafford undertook to
do immediately after their departure. It was to take place on the next
day; and Emmeline, with the concurrence of her friend, determined that
she would take no leave of the party at Woodfield: for tho' the
appearance of mystery was extremely disagreeable and distressing to
Emmeline, she knew that notice of her intentions would excite enquiries
and awaken curiosity very difficult to satisfy; and that it was
extremely probable James Crofts might be employed to watch her, and by
that means render abortive all her endeavours to preserve the unhappy
Lady Adelina.

Relying therefore on the generosity and innocence of her intentions, she
chose rather to leave her own actions open to censure which they did not
deserve, than to risk an investigation which might be fatal to the
interest of her poor friend. She took nothing with her, Mrs. Stafford
undertaking every necessary arrangement about her cloaths--and having at
night taken a tender leave of this beloved and valuable woman, and
promised to write to her constantly and to return as soon as the destiny
of Lady Adelina should be decided, they parted.

And Emmeline, arising before the dawn of the following morning, set out
alone to Woodbury Forest--a precaution absolutely necessary, to evade
the inquisitive watchfulness of James Crofts. She stole softly down
stairs, before even the servants were stirring, and opening the door
cautiously, felt some degree of terror at being obliged to undertake so
long a walk alone at such an hour. But innocence gave her courage, and
friendly zeal lent her strength. As she walked on, her fears subsided.
She saw the sun rise above the horizon, and her apprehensions were at an
end.

As no carriage could approach within three quarters of a mile of the
house where Lady Adelina was concealed, they were obliged to walk to the
road where Mrs. Stafford had directed a post chaise to wait for them,
which she had hired at a distant town, where it was unlikely any enquiry
would be made.

Long disuse, as she had hardly ever left the cottage from the moment of
her entering it, and the extreme weakness to which she was reduced, made
Emmeline greatly fear that Lady Adelina would never be able to reach the
place. With her assistance, and that of her Ladyship's woman, slowly and
faintly she walked thither; and Emmeline saw her happily placed in the
chaise. Every thing had been before settled as to the conveyance of the
servant and baggage, and to engage the secresy of the woman with whom
she had dwelt, by making her silence sufficiently advantageous; and as
they hoped that no traces were left by which they might be followed, the
spirits of the fair travellers seemed somewhat to improve as they
proceeded on their journey.--Emmeline felt her heart elated with the
consciousness of doing good; and from the tender affection and
assistance of such a friend, which could be considered only as the
benevolence of heaven itself, Lady Adelina drew a favourable omen, and
dared entertain a faint hope that her penitence had been accepted.

They arrived without any accident at Bath, the following day; and
Emmeline, leaving Lady Adelina at the inn, went out immediately to
secure lodgings in a retired part of the town. As soon as it was dark,
Lady Adelina removed thither in a chair; and was announced by Emmeline
to be the wife of a Swiss officer, to be herself of Switzerland, and to
bear the name of Mrs. St. Laure--while she herself, as she was very
little known, continued to pass by her own name in the few transactions
which in their very private way of living required her name to be
repeated.

When Mrs. Ashwood found that Emmeline had left Woodfield clandestinely
and alone, and that Mrs. Stafford evaded giving any account whither she
was gone, by saying coldly that she was gone to visit a friend in
Surrey whom she formerly knew in Wales, all the suspicions she had
herself harboured, and Miss Galton encouraged, seemed confirmed. James
Crofts had related, not without exaggerations, what he had been witness
to in the copse; and it was no longer doubted but that she was gone with
Fitz-Edward, which at once accounted for her departure and the sudden
and mysterious manner in which it was accomplished. James Crofts had
suspicions that his behaviour had hastened it; but he failed not to
confirm Mrs. Ashwood in her prepossession that her entanglement with
Fitz-Edward was now at a period when it could be no longer
concealed--intelligence which was to be conveyed to Delamere.

The elder Crofts, who had been some time with Lady Montreville and her
daughter, had named Delamere from time to time in his letters to his
brother. The last, mentioned that he was now with his mother and sister,
who were at Nice, and who purposed returning to England in about three
months. Crofts represented Delamere as still devoted to Emmeline; and as
existing only in the hope of being no longer opposed in his intention of
marrying her in March, when the year which he had promised his father to
wait expired; but that Lady Montreville, as time wore away, grew more
averse to the match, and more desirous of some event which might break
it off. Crofts gave his brother a very favourable account of his
progress with Miss Delamere; and hinted that if he could be fortunate
enough to put an end to Delamere's intended connection, it would so
greatly conciliate the favour of Lady Montreville, that he dared hope
she would no longer oppose his union with her daughter: and when once
they were married, and the prejudices of the mother to an inferior
alliance conquered, he had very little doubt of Lord Montreville's
forgiveness, and of soon regaining his countenance and friendship.

This account from his brother added another motive to those which
already influenced the malignant and illiberal mind of James Crofts to
injure the lovely orphan, and he determined to give all his assistance
to Mrs. Ashwood in the cruel project of depriving her at once of her
character and her lover. In a consultation which he held on this subject
with his promised bride and Miss Galton, the ladies agreed that it was
perfectly shocking that such a fine young man as Mr. Delamere should be
attached to a woman so little sensible of his value as Emmeline; that it
had long been evident she was to him indifferent, and it was now too
clear that she was partial to another; and that therefore it would be a
meritorious action to acquaint him of her intimacy with Fitz-Edward; and
it could not be doubted but his knowledge of it would, high spirited as
he was, cure him effectually of his ill-placed passion, and restore the
tranquillity of his respectable family. Hiding thus the inveterate envy
and malice of their hearts under this hypocritical pretence, they next
considered how to give the information which was so meritorious.
Anonymous letters were expedients to which Miss Galton had before had
recourse, and to an anonymous letter they determined to commit the
secret of Emmeline's infidelity--while James Crofts, in his letters to
his brother, was to corroborate the intelligence it contained, by
relating as mere matter of news what had actually and evidently
happened, Emmeline's sudden departure from Woodfield.

Delamere, when he saw his mother out of danger at Barege, had returned
to the neighbourhood of Paris, where he had lingered some time, in hopes
that Emmeline would accede to his request of being allowed to cross the
channel for a few days; but her answer, in which she strongly urged the
hazard he would incur of giving his father a pretence to withdraw _his_
promise, by violating his own, had obliged him, tho' with infinite
reluctance, to give up the scheme; and being quite indifferent where he
was, if he was still at a distance from her, he had yielded to the
solicitations of Lady Montreville, and rejoined her at Nice. There, he
now remained; while every thing in England seemed to contribute to
assist the designs of those who wished to disengage him from his passion
for Emmeline.

The day after Emmeline's departure with Lady Adelina, Fitz-Edward went
to Woodfield; and hearing that Miss Mowbray had suddenly left it, was
thrown into the utmost astonishment--astonishment which Mrs. Ashwood and
Miss Galton observed to each other was the finest piece of acting they
had ever seen.

The whole party were together when he was introduced--a circumstance
Mrs. Stafford would willingly have avoided, as it was absolutely
necessary for her to speak to him alone; and determined to do so,
whatever construction the malignity of her sister-in-law might put upon
it, she said--

'I have long promised you, Colonel, a sight of the two pieces of drawing
which Miss Mowbray and I have finished as companions. They are now
framed; and if you will come with me into my dressing-room you shall see
them.'

As the rest of the company had frequently seen these drawings, there was
no pretence for their following Mrs. Stafford; who, accompanied by the
Colonel, went to her dressing room.

A conference thus evidently sought by Mrs. Stafford, excited the eager
and painful curiosity of the party in the parlour.

'Now would I give the world,' cried Mrs. Ashwood, 'to know what is going
forward.'

'Is it not possible to listen?' enquired Crofts, equal to any meanness
that might gratify the malevolence of another or his own.

'Yes,' replied Mrs. Ashwood, 'if one could get into the closet next the
dressing-room without being perceived, which can only be done by passing
thro' the nursery. If indeed the nursery maids and children are out, it
is easy enough.'

'They are out, mama, I assure you,' cried Miss Ashwood, 'for I saw them
myself go across the lawn since I've been at breakfast. Do, pray let us
go and listen--I long of all things to know what my aunt Stafford can
have to say to that sly-looking Colonel.'

'No, no, child,' said her mother, 'I shall not send you, indeed--but
Crofts, do you think we should be able to make it out?'

'Egad,' answered he, 'I'll try--for depend upon it the mischief will
out. It will be rare, to have such a pretty tale to tell Mr. Delamere of
his demure-looking little dear.--I'll venture.'

Mrs. Ashwood then shewing him the way, he went on tip toe up stairs, and
concealing himself in a light closet which was divided from the dressing
room only by lath and plaister, he lent an attentive ear to the dialogue
that was passing.

It happened, however, that the window near which Mrs. Stafford and
Fitz-Edward were sitting was exactly opposite to that side of the room
to which Crofts' hiding-place communicated; and tho' the room was not
large, yet the distance, the partition, and the low voice in which both
parties spoke, made it impossible for him to distinguish more than
broken sentences. From Mrs. Stafford he heard--'Could not longer be
concealed--in all probability may now remain unknown--the child, I will
myself attend to.' From Fitz-Edward, he could only catch indistinct
sounds; his voice appearing to be lost in his emotion. But he seemed to
be thanking Mrs. Stafford, and lamenting his own unhappiness. His last
speech, in which his powers of utterance were returned, was--'Nothing
can ever erase the impression of your angelic goodness, best and
loveliest of friends!--oh, continue it, I beseech you, to those for whom
only I am solicitous, and forgive all the trouble I have given you!'

He then hurried away. Mrs. Stafford, after remaining alone a moment as
if to compose herself, went back to the parlour; and Crofts, who thought
he had heard enough, tho' he wished to have heard all, slunk from his
closet and walked into the garden; where being soon afterwards joined by
Mrs. Ashwood and Miss Galton, he, by relating the broken and disjointed
discourse he had been witness to, left not a doubt remaining of the
cause of Emmeline's precipitate retreat from Woodfield.

And perhaps minds more candid than their's--minds untainted with the
odious and hateful envy which ulcerated their's, might, from the
circumstances that attended her going and Fitz-Edward's behaviour, have
conceived disadvantageous ideas of her conduct. But such was the
uneasiness with which Mrs. Ashwood ever beheld superior merit, and such
the universal delight which Miss Galton took in defamation, that had
none of those circumstances existed, they would with equal malignity
have studied to ruin the reputation of Emmeline; and probably with equal
success--for against such attacks, innocence, however it may console
it's possessor, is too frequently a feeble and inadequate defence!

While the confederates, exulting in the certainty of Emmeline's ruin,
were manufacturing the letter which was to alarm the jealous and
irascible spirit of Delamere, Fitz-Edward, (from whom Mrs. Stafford,
before she would tell him any thing, had extorted a promise that he
would enquire no farther than what she chose to relate to him,) was
relieved from insupportable anguish by hearing that Lady Adelina was in
safe hands; but he lamented in bitterness of soul the despondency and
affliction to which Mrs. Stafford had told him she entirely resigned
herself. He knew not that Emmeline was with her, whatever he might
suspect; and Mrs. Stafford had protested to him, that if he made any
attempt to discover the residence of Lady Adelina, or persisted in
meeting her brother, she would immediately relinquish all concern in the
affair, and no longer interest herself in what his rashness would
inevitably render desperate.

He solemnly assured her he would take no measures without her
knowledge; and remained at Tylehurst, secluded from every body, and
waiting in fearful and anxious solicitude to hear of Lady Adelina by
Mrs. Stafford.

Delamere, (still at Nice with his mother,) who with different sources of
uneasiness thought the days and weeks insupportably long in which he
lived only in the hope of seeing Emmeline at the end of six months, was
roused from his involuntary resignation by the following letter, written
in a hand perfectly unknown to him.


  'Sir,

    'A friend to your worthy and noble family writes this; which is
  meant to serve you, and to undeceive you in regard to Miss
  Mowbray--who, without any gratitude for the high honour you intend
  her, is certainly too partial to another person. She is now gone
  from Woodfield to escape observation; and none but Mrs. Stafford is
  let into the secret of where she is. You will judge what end it is
  to answer; but certainly none that bodes you good. One would have
  supposed that the Colonel's being very often her attendant at
  Woodfield might have made her stay there agreeable enough; but
  perhaps (for I do not aver it) the young lady has some particular
  reasons for wishing to have private lodgings. No doubt the Colonel
  is a man of gallantry; but his friendship to you is rather more
  questionable. The writer of this having very little knowledge of the
  parties, can have no other motive than the love of justice, and
  being sorry to see deceit and falsehood practised on a young
  gentleman who deserves better, and who has a respectful tho' unknown
  friend in

                                                                 Y. Z.'

  _London, July 22, 17--._


This infamous scroll had no sooner been perused by Delamere, than fury
flashed from his eyes, and anguish seized his heart. But the moment the
suddenness of his passion gave way to reflection, the tumult of his mind
subsided, and he thought it must be an artifice of his mother's to
separate him from Emmeline. The longer he considered her inveterate
antipathy to his marriage, the more he was convinced that this artifice,
unworthy as it was, she was capable of conceiving, and, by means of the
Crofts, executing, if she hoped by it to put an eternal conclusion to
his affection. He at length so entirely adopted this idea, that
determining 'to be revenged and love her better for it,' and to
settle the matter very peremptorily with the Crofts' if they had been
found to interfere, he obtained a tolerable command over his temper and
his features, and joined Lady Montreville and Miss Delamere, whom he
found reading letters which they also had received from England. His
mother asked slightly after his; and, in a few moments, Mr. Crofts
arrived, asking, with his usual assiduity, after the health of Lord
Montreville and that of such friends as usually wrote to her Ladyship?
She answered his enquiries--and then desired to hear what news Sir
Richard or his other correspondents had sent him?

'My father's letters,' said he, 'contain little more than an order to
purchase some particular sort of wine which he is very circumstantial,
as usual, in telling me how to forward safely. He adds, indeed, that he
can allow my absence no longer than until the 20th of September.'--He
sighed, and looked tenderly at Miss Delamere.

'I have no other letters,' continued he, 'but one from James.'

'And does he tell you no news,' asked Lady Montreville?

'Nothing,' answered Crofts, carelessly, 'but gossip, which I believe
would not entertain your Ladyship.'

'Oh, why should you fancy that,' returned she--'you know I love to hear
news, tho' about people I never saw or ever wish to see.'

'James has been at Mr. Stafford's at Woodfield,' said he, 'where your
Ladyship has certainly no acquaintance.'

'At Woodfield, Sir?' cried Delamere, unable to express his anxiety--'at
Woodfield!--And what does he say of Woodfield?'

'I don't recollect any thing very particular,' answered Crofts,
carelessly--'I believe I put the letter into my pocket.' He took it out.

'Read it to us Crofts'--said Miss Delamere.


    ----'I have lately passed a very agreeable month at Woodfield.
  We were a large party in the house. Among other pleasant
  circumstances, during my stay there, was a ball and _fete
  champetre_, given by Mr. Conway on his son's coming of age. It was
  elegant, and well conducted beyond any entertainment of the sort I
  ever saw. There were forty couple, and a great number of very
  pretty women; but it was agreed on all hands that Miss Mowbray
  would have eclipsed them all, who unluckily declined going. She
  left Woodfield a day or two afterwards.'


Delamere's countenance changed.--Crofts, as if looking for some other
news in his letter, hesitated, then smiled, and went on.--


    'The gossip Fame has made a match for me with Mrs. Ashwood. I
  wish she may be right. In some other of her stories I really think
  her wrong, so I will not be the means of their circulation.'


'The rest,' said Crofts, putting up the letter, 'is only about my
father's new purchases and other family affairs.'

Delamere, who, in spite of his suspicions of Crofts' treachery, could
not hear this corroboration of his anonymous letter without a renewal of
all his fears, left the room in doubt, suspence and wretchedness.

The seeds of jealousy and mistrust thus skilfully sown, could hardly
fail of taking root in an heart so full of sensibility, and a temper so
irritable as his. Again he read over his anonymous letter, and compared
it with the intelligence which seemed accidentally communicated by
Crofts; and with a fearful kind of enquiry compared the date and
circumstances. He dared hardly trust his mind with the import of this
investigation; and found nothing on which to rest his hope, but that it
might be a concerted plan between his mother and Crofts.

His heart alternately swelling between the indignation such a
supposition created and shrinking with horror from the idea of perfidy
on the part of Emmeline, kept him in such a state of mind that he could
hardly be said to possess his reason. But when he remembered how often
his extreme vivacity had betrayed him into error, and hazarded his
losing for ever all he held valuable on earth, he tried to subdue the
acuteness of his feelings, and to support at least without betraying it,
the anguish which oppressed him, till the next pacquet from England,
when it was possible a letter from Emmeline herself might dissipate his
doubts. Resolutely however resolving to call Crofts to a serious
account, if he found him accessory to a calumny so dark and diabolical.

When the next post from England arrived, he saw, among the letters which
were delivered to him, one directed by the hand of Emmeline. He flew to
his own room, and with trembling hands broke the seal.

It was short, and he fancied unusually cold. Towards it's close, she
mentioned that she was going to Bath for a few weeks with a friend, and
as she did not know where she should lodge, thought he had better not
write till she was again fixed at Woodfield.

That she should go to Bath in July, with a nameless friend, and quit so
abruptly her beloved Mrs. Stafford--that she should apparently wish to
evade his letters, and make her actual residence a secret--were a cloud
of circumstances calculated to persuade him that some mystery involved
her conduct; a mystery which the fatal letter served too evidently to
explain.

As if fire had been laid to the train of combustibles which had, since
the receipt of it, been accumulating in the bosom of Delamere, his
furious and uncontroulable spirit now burst forth. A temporary delirium
seized him; he stamped round the room, and ran to his pistols, which
fortunately were not charged. The noise he made brought Millefleur into
the room, whom he instantly caught by the collar, and shaking him
violently, cried--

'Scoundrel!--why are not these pistols loaded?'

'_Eh! eh! Monsieur!_' exclaimed Millefleur, almost strangled-'_que
voudriez vous?--vos pistolets!--Mon Dieu! que voudriez vous avec vos
pistolets?_'

'Shoot _you_ perhaps, you blockhead!' raved Delamere, pushing furiously
from him the trembling valet--then snatching up the pistols, he half
kicked, half pushed him out of the room, and throwing them after him,
ordered him to clean and load them: after which he locked the door, and
threw himself upon the bed.

The resolution he had made in his cooler moments, never again to yield
to such impetuous transports of passion, was now forgotten. He could not
conquer, he could not even mitigate the tumultuous anguish which had
seized him; but seemed rather to call to his remembrance all that might
justify it's excess.

He remembered how positively Emmeline had forbidden his returning to
England, tho' all he asked was to be allowed to see her for a few hours.
He recollected her long and invincible coldness; her resolute adherence
to the promise she need not have given; and forgetting all the symptoms
which he had before fondly believed he had discovered of her returning
his affection, he exaggerated every circumstance that indicated
indifference, and magnified them into signs of absolute aversion.

Tho' he could not forget that Fitz-Edward had assisted him in carrying
Emmeline away, and had on all occasions promoted his interest with her,
that recollection did not at all weaken the probability of his present
attachment; for such was Delamere's opinion of Fitz-Edward's principles,
that he believed he was capable of the most dishonourable views on the
mistress, or even on the wife of his friend. He tortured his imagination
almost to madness, by remembering numberless little incidents, which,
tho' almost unattended to at the time, now seemed to bring the cruellest
conviction of their intelligence--particularly that on the night he had
taken Emmeline from Clapham, Fitz-Edward was found there; tho' neither
his father or himself, who had repeatedly sent to his lodgings, could
either find him at home or get any direction where to meet with him.
Almost all his late letters too had been dated from Tylehurst, where it
was certain he had passed the greatest part of the summer.--Fitz-Edward,
fond of society, and courted by the most brilliant circles, shut himself
up in a country house, distant from all his connections. And to what
could such an extraordinary change be owing, if not to his attachment to
Emmeline Mowbray?

Irritated by these recollections, he gave himself up to all the dreadful
torments of jealousy--jealousy even to madness; and he felt this
corrosive passion in all it's extravagance. It was violent in proportion
to his love and his pride, and more insupportably painful in proportion
to it's novelty; for except once at Swansea, when he fancied that
Emmeline in her flight was accompanied by Fitz-Edward, he had never felt
it before; however they might serve him as a pretence, Rochely and
Elkerton were both too contemptible to excite it.

The night approached; and without having regained any share of
composure, he had at length determined to quit Nice the next day, that
his mother and Crofts might not be gratified with the sight of his
despair, and triumph in the detected perfidy of Emmeline.

Lady Montreville and her daughter were out when the letters arrived; and
he now apprehended that when they returned Millefleur might alarm them
by an account of his frantic behaviour, and that they would guess it to
have been occasioned by his letters from England. Starting up,
therefore, he called the poor fellow to him, who was not yet recovered
from his former terrifying menaces; and who approached, trembling, the
table where Delamere sat; his dress disordered, his eyes flashing fire,
and his lips pale and quivering.

'Come here, Sir!' sternly cried he.

Millefleur sprung close to the table.

'Have you cleaned and loaded my pistols?'

'_Monsieur--je, je m'occupais--je, je--Monsieur, ils sont----_'

'Fool, of what are you afraid?--what does the confounded _poltron_
tremble for?'

'_Mais Monsieur--c'est que--que--mais Monsieur, je ne scais!_'

'_Tenez_, Mr. Millefleur!' said Delamere sharply--'Remember what I am
going to say. Something has happened to vex me, and I shall go out
to-morrow for a few days, or perhaps I may go to England. My mother is
to know nothing of it, but what I shall myself tell her; therefore at
your peril speak of what has happened this evening, or of my intentions
for to-morrow. Come up immediately, and put my things into my
portmanteaus, and put my fire arms in order. I shall take you with me.
David need not be prepared till to-morrow. I shall go on horseback and
shall want him also. The least failure on your part of executing these
orders, you will find very inconvenient--you know I will not be trifled
with.'

Millefleur, frightened to death at the looks and voice of his master,
dared not disobey; and Delamere employing him in putting up his cloaths
till after Lady Montreville came in, was, he thought, secure of his
secresy. He then made an effort, tho' a successless one, to hide the
anguish that devoured him; and went down to supper. He found, that
besides their constant attendant Crofts, his mother and sister were
accompanied by two other English gentlemen, and a French man of fashion
and his sister, who full of the vivacity and gaiety of their country,
kept up a lively conversation with Miss Delamere and the Englishmen. But
Delamere hardly spoke--his eyes were wild and inflamed--his cheeks
flushed--and deep sighs seemed involuntarily to burst from his heart.
Lady Montreville observed him, and then said--

'Surely, Frederic, you are not well?'

'Not very well,' said he; 'but I am otherwise, merely from the
intolerable heat. I have had the head-ache all day.'

'The head-ache!' exclaimed his mother--'Why then do you not go to bed?'

'No,' answered he, 'I am better up. Since the heat is abated, I am in
less pain. I will take a walk by the fine moon that I see is rising, and
be back again presently--and to-morrow,' continued he--'to-morrow, I
shall go northward for a month. I cannot stay under this burning
atmosphere.'

Then desiring the company not to move on his account, he arose from
table and hastened away.

'Do, my good Crofts,' said Lady Montreville--'do follow Frederic--he
frightens me to death--he is certainly very ill.'

Crofts hesitated a moment, being in truth afraid to interfere with
Delamere's ramble while he was in a humour so gloomy; but on her
Ladyship's repeating her request, dared not shew his reluctance. He went
out therefore under pretence of following him; while the party present,
seeing Lady Montreville's distress, almost immediately departed.

Crofts walked on without much desire to fulfill his commission; for
Delamere, whenever he was obliged to associate with him, treated him
generally with coldness, and sometimes rudely. There was, however, very
little probability of his overtaking him; for Delamere had walked or
rather run to a considerable distance from the street where his mother
lived, and then wandering farther into the fields, had thrown himself
upon the grass, and had forgotten every thing but Emmeline--'Emmeline
and Fitz-Edward gone together!--the mistress on whom he had so fondly
doated!--the friend whom he had so implicitly trusted!' These cruel
images, drest in every form most fatal to his peace, tormented him, and
the agony of disappointed passion seemed to have affected his brain.
Deep groans forced their way from his oppressed heart--he cursed his
existence, and seemed resolutely bent, in the gloominess of his despair,
to shake it off and free himself from sufferings so intolerable.

To the first effusions of his phrenzy, a sullen calm, more alarming,
succeeded. He fixed his eyes on the moon which shone above him, but had
no idea of what he saw, or where he was; his breath was short, his hands
clenched; he seemed as if, having lost the power of complaint, he was
unable to express the pain that convulsed his whole frame.

While he continued in this situation, a favourite little spaniel of his
mother's, of which he had from a boy been fond, ran up to him and licked
his hands and face. The caresses of an animal he had so long remembered,
touched some chord of the heart that vibrated to softer emotions than
those which had for the last three hours possessed him--he burst into
tears.

'Felix!' said he, sobbing, 'poor Felix!'

The dog, rejoicing to be noticed, ran barking round him; and presently
afterwards, with hurried steps, came Miss Delamere, leaning on the arm
of Crofts.

'My God!' exclaimed she, almost screaming, 'here he is! Oh Frederic, you
have so terrified my mother! and Mr. Crofts has been two hours in search
of you. Had it not been for the dog, we should not now have found you.
Mr. Crofts has returned twice to the house without you.'

'Mr. Crofts may return then a third time,' said Delamere, 'and cease to
give himself such unnecessary trouble.'

'But you will come with us, brother?--Surely you will now come home?'

'At my leisure,' replied he, sternly--'Lady Montreville need be under no
apprehensions about me. I shall be at home presently. But I will not be
importuned! I will not be watched and followed! and above all, I will
not have a governor!'

So saying, he turned from them and walked another way; while they,
seeing him so impracticable, could only return to report what they had
seen to Lady Montreville. Delamere, however, who had taken another way,
entered the house at the same moment.

Lady Montreville had strictly questioned Millefleur as to the cause of
his master's disorder; and the poor fellow, who dared not relate the
furious passion into which he had fallen on reading his letter,
trembled, prevaricated, stammered, and looked so white, that her
Ladyship, more alarmed, fancied she knew not what; and full of terror,
had sent out Crofts a second time, and the servants different ways, in
search of her son. At length Crofts returning the second time without
success, Miss Delamere went with him herself; and the dog following her,
led her to her brother. But before their return, Lady Montreville's
apprehensions had arisen to such an height, that a return of her fits
seemed to threaten her, and with difficulty was she brought to her
senses when she saw him before her; and when he, moved by the keenness
of her sorrow at his imaginary danger, assured her, in answer to her
repeated enquiries, that he was merely affected by the heat; that he had
no material complaint, and should be quite well and in his usual spirits
when he returned from the excursion he proposed going upon the next day.
Then, being somewhat appeased, his mother suffered him to retire; and
called her counsellor, Mr. Crofts, to debate whether in such a frame of
mind she ought to allow the absence of Delamere? Crofts advised her by
all means to let him go. He suspected indeed that the anonymous letter
had occasioned all the wild behaviour he had been witness to, and
thought it very likely that Delamere might be going to England. But he
knew that James Crofts and his fair associates were prepared for the
completion of their project if he did; and his absence was, on account
of Crofts' own affairs, particularly desirable.

For these reasons, he represented to Lady Montreville that opposition
would only irritate and inflame her son, without inducing him to stay.
He departed, therefore, the next morning, without any impediment on the
part of his mother; but was yet undecided whither to go. While Crofts,
no longer thwarted by his observation, or humbled by his haughty
disdain, managed matters so well, that in spite of the pride of noble
blood, in spite of her reluctance to marry a commoner, he conquered and
silenced all the scruples and objections of Miss Delamere; and a young
English clergyman, a friend of his, coming to Nice, as both he and
Crofts declared, _by the meerest accident in the world_, just about that
time, Crofts obtained her consent to a private marriage; and his friend
took especial care that no form might be wanting, to enable him legally
to claim his bride, on their return to England.



