

Mrs. Stafford no sooner heard from Emmeline that Godolphin was yet
ignorant of the true reason of Lady Adelina's concealment, than she saw
the necessity of immediately explaining it; and this task, however
painful, she without hesitation undertook.

He was therefore summoned to their lodgings by a note from Emmeline, who
on his arrival introduced him to Mrs. Stafford, and left them together;
when, with as much tenderness as possible, and mingling with the
mortifying detail many representations of the necessity there was for
his conquering his resentment, she at length concluded it; watching
anxiously the changes in Godolphin's countenance, which sometimes
expressed only pity and affection for his sister, sometimes rage and
indignation against Fitz-Edward.

Both the brothers of Lady Adelina had been accustomed to consider her
with peculiar fondness. The unfortunate circumstance of her losing her
mother immediately after her birth, seemed to have given her a
melancholy title to their tenderness; and the resemblance she bore to
that dear mother, whom they both remembered, and on whose memory their
father dwelt with undiminished regret, endeared her to them still more.
To these united claims on the heart and the protection of William
Godolphin, another was added equally forcible, in a letter written by
his father with the trembling hand of anxious solicitude, when he felt
himself dying, and when, looking back with lingering affection on the
children of her whom he hoped soon to rejoin, he saw with anguish his
youngest daughter liable from her situation to deviate into
indiscretion, and surrounded by the numberless dangers which attend on a
young and beautiful woman, whose husband has neither talents to attach
her affections or judgment to direct her actions. Lord Westhaven,
conscious of her hazardous circumstances, and feeling in his last
moments the keenest anguish, in knowing that his mistaken care had
exposed her to them, hoped, by interesting both her brothers to watch
over her, that he should obviate the dangers he apprehended. He had
therefore, in all their conversations, recommended her to his eldest
son; and as he was not happy enough to embrace the younger before he
died, had addressed to him a last letter on the same subject.

Such were the powerful ties that bound Mr. Godolphin to love and defend
Lady Adelina with more than a brother's fondness. Hastening therefore to
obey the dying injunctions of his father, and in the hope of rendering
the life of this beloved sister, if not happy, at least honourable and
contented, he had heard, that she had clandestinely absented herself
from her family, and after a long search had found her abandoned to
remorse and despair; her reputation blasted; her health ruined; her
intellects disordered; and all by the perfidy of a man, in whom he, from
long friendship, and his sister, from family connection, had placed
unbounded confidence.

Tho' Godolphin had one of the best tempers in the world--a temper which
the roughness of those among whom he lived had only served to soften and
humanize, and which was immovable by the usual accidents that ruffle
others, yet he had also in a great excess all those keen feelings, which
fill a heart of extreme sensibility; added to a courage, that in the
hour of danger had been proved to be as cool as it was undaunted. Of him
might be said what was the glorious praise of immortal Bayard--that he
was '_sans peur et sans reproche_;'[1] and educated with a high sense of
honour himself, as well as possessing a heart calculated to enjoy, and a
hand to defend, the unblemished dignity of his family, all his passions
were roused and awakened by the injury it had sustained from
Fitz-Edward, and he beheld him as a monster whom it was infamy to
forgive. Hardly therefore had Mrs. Stafford concluded her distressing
recital, than, as if commanding himself by a violent effort, he thanked
her warmly yet incoherently for her unexampled goodness to his sister,
recommended her still to her generous care, and the friendship of Miss
Mowbray, and without any threat against Fitz-Edward, or even a comment
on what he had heard, arose to depart. But Mrs. Stafford, more alarmed
by this determined tho' quiet resentment and by the expression of his
countenance than if he had burst into exclamations and menaces,
perceived that the crisis was now come when he must either be persuaded
to conquer his just resentment, or by giving it way destroy, while he
attempted to revenge, the fame of his sister.

She besought him therefore to sit down a moment; and when he had done
so, she told him, that if he really thought himself under any
obligations to Miss Mowbray or to her for the services they had been so
fortunate as to render Lady Adelina, his making all they had been doing
ineffectual, would be a most mortifying return; and such must be the
case, if he rashly flew to seek vengeance on Fitz-Edward: 'for that you
have such a design,' continued she, 'I have no doubt; allow me, however,
to suppose that I have, by doing your sister some good offices, acquired
a right to speak of her affairs.'

'Surely,' answered Mr. Godolphin, 'you have; and surely I must hear with
respect and attention, tho' possibly not with conviction, every opinion
with which you may honour me.'

She then represented to him, with all the force of reason, how little he
could remedy the evil by hazarding his own life or by taking that of
Fitz-Edward.

'At present,' continued she, 'the secret is known only to me, Miss
Mowbray, and Lady Adelina's woman; if it is farther exposed, the heirs
of Mr. Trelawny, who are so deeply interested, will undoubtedly take
measures to prove that the infant has no just claim to the estate they
so eagerly expect. Mr. Trelawny's sister has already entertained
suspicions, which the least additional information would give her
grounds to pursue, and the whole affair must then inevitably become
public. Surely this consideration alone should determine you--why then
need I urge others equally evident and equally forcible.'

Godolphin acknowledged that there was much of truth in the arguments she
used; but denied that any consideration should influence him to forgive
the man who had thus basely and ungenerously betrayed the confidence of
his family.

'However,' added he again, checking the heat into which he feared a
longer conversation on this subject might betray him--'I have not yet,
Madam, absolutely formed the resolution of which you seem so
apprehensive; and am indeed too cruelly hurt to be able to talk longer
on the subject. Suffer me therefore once more to bid you a good day!'

But the encreasing gloom of his countenance, and forced calm of his
manner, appeared to be symptoms so unfavourable, that Mrs. Stafford
thought there was no hope of being able to prevent an immediate and
fatal meeting between him and Fitz-Edward but by engaging him in a
promise at least to delay it; this she attempted by the most earnest
arguments, and the most pressing persuasions; but all she could obtain
was an assurance that he would remain at Bath 'till the next day, and
see her again in the evening.

In the mean time the delirium of Lady Adelina, (which had recurred at
intervals ever since the transient sight she had of her brother) more
frequently, and with more alarming symptoms, returned; and the fever
which had at first threatened the loss of her life, now seemed to be
fixing on her brain, and to menace, by a total deprivation of reason,
reducing her to a condition to which death itself must be preferable.
She still, even in her wildest wanderings, knew Emmeline, and still
caressed her little boy; but much of her time passed in incoherent and
rambling discourse; in which she talked of Fitz-Edward and her brother
William, and held with them both imaginary dialogues. Sometimes she
deprecated the wrath of her elder brother: and then her disordered fancy
ran to the younger; to him from whom she had, in her early life, found
pity and protection in all her little sorrows.

Mrs. Stafford thought it too hazardous to let her again see her brother,
while her intellects were thus disarranged; as she trembled lest she
should start into actual madness. But it was absolutely necessary to do
something; not only because Mr. Godolphin's impatience made every delay
dangerous, but because it was hardly possible to keep the secret from
the physicians and attendants, who had already heard much more than they
ought to have known.

She determined, therefore, after consulting with Emmeline, to introduce
Godolphin into the room adjoining to that where Lady Adelina now sat
some hours every day in an easy chair. The affecting insanity of his
unhappy sister, and the mournful and pathetic entreaties she frequently
used, were likely, in the opinion of the fair friends, to effectuate
more than their most earnest persuasions; and prevail on him to drop all
thoughts of that resentment, which could not cure but might encrease her
calamities.

Mrs. Stafford had heard from him, that he gained information as to the
place of his sister's residence from the mother of Lady Adelina's woman;
who being the reduced widow of a clergyman, resided in the Bishop's
alms-houses at Bromley, where her daughter frequently sent her such
assistance as her own oeconomy, or the bounty of her lady, enabled her
to supply. A few weeks before, she had sent her a note for ten pounds;
and not apprehending that an enquiry would be made of her, had desired
her to acknowledge the receipt of it, and direct to her at Bath, where
she said her lady was with a Miss Mowbray.

Lady Clancarryl, among many expedients to recover traces of her sister,
had at length recollected this widow, and had desired Mr. Godolphin to
make immediate enquiry of her.

He had hastened therefore to Bromley, and easily found the poor woman,
who was paralytic and almost childish. Her letters were read for her by
one of her neighbours; a person, who, being present at the arrival of
Mr. Godolphin, immediately found that something was to be got; and
busily put into his hands the very letter which had enclosed the note,
and which contained the direction.

He eagerly copied the address; and leaving a handsome present for the
use of the old widow, he delayed not a moment to set out for Bath,
where he soon found the house, and where he had enquired for Lady
Adelina Trelawny.

The servant of the house who opened the door assured him no such person
was there. He supposed that for some reason or other she was denied; and
insisting on being allowed to go up stairs, had entered the room in the
abrupt manner which had so greatly alarmed his sister.

In hopes of counteracting the fatal effects of the discovery which had
unavoidably followed this interview, Godolphin was, on his return in the
afternoon, introduced into the dining-room, which opened into Lady
Adelina's bed-chamber. The door was a-jar; the partition thin; and Mrs.
Stafford was pretty well assured that the poor patient would be heard
distinctly. Godolphin came in, pale from the conflict of his mind; and
all his features expressed anger and sorrow, with which he seemed vainly
struggling. He bowed, and sat down in silence.

Mrs. Stafford only was in the room; and as soon as he was seated, said,
in a low voice, yet with forced chearfulness--

'Well, Sir, I hope that Miss Mowbray and myself have prevailed on you to
drop at present every other design than the truly generous one of
healing the wounded heart of our fair unfortunate friend.'

'And shall he who has wounded it,' slowly and sternly replied
Godolphin--'shall he who has wounded it so basely, escape me?'

At this instant Lady Adelina, who had been some time silent, exclaimed
hastily--'Oh! spare him! my dear brother! and spare your poor Adelina!
who will not trouble--who will not disgrace you long!'

'Where is she?' said Godolphin, starting--'Good God! what is it I hear?'

'Your unhappy sister,' answered Mrs. Stafford; 'whom the idea of your
determined vengeance has already driven to distraction.'

Again Lady Adelina spoke. Her brother listened in breathless anguish.

'Ah! William!--and are _you_ grown cruel? You, on whom I depended for
pity and protection?'

'Surely,' said he, 'surely she knows I am here?'

'No,' answered Mrs. Stafford, 'she knows nothing. But this fear has
incessantly pursued her; and since she saw you she dwells more
frequently on it, tho' her erring memory sometimes wanders to other
objects.'

'It is very true, my Lord!' cried Lady Adelina, with affected calmness,
her thoughts wavering again towards Lord Westhaven--'It is all very
true! I have deserved all your reproaches! I am ready to make all the
atonement I can! Then you will both of you, my brothers, be
satisfied--for William has told me that if I died he should be content,
for then all might be forgotten.' She ended with a deep sigh; and
Godolphin, wildly starting from his seat, said--

'This is too much! you cannot expect me to bear this!--let me go to
her!'

'Would you go then,' answered Mrs. Stafford, 'to confirm her fears and
to drive her to deeper desperation? If you see her, it must be to soothe
and comfort her; to assure her of your forgiveness, and that you will
bury your resentment against----'

'Accursed! doubly accursed be the infamous villain who has driven her to
this! And must I bear it tamely! Oh! injured memory of my father!--oh!
my poor, undone sister!' He walked about the room; the tears ran from
his eyes; and Mrs. Stafford, fearing that his hurried step and deep sobs
would be heard by Lady Adelina, determined to bring the scene to a
crisis and not to lose the influence she hoped she had gained on his
mind. She therefore went into the other room, and shutting the door,
advanced with a smile towards the lovely lunatic.

'What will you say, my dear Adelina, if I bring you the best news you
can possibly hear?'

'News!' repeated Lady Adelina, looking at her with eyes which too
plainly denoted her unsettled mind--'News!--Ah! dear Madam! I know very
well that all the world is happy but me; and if you are happy, I am very
glad; but as to _me_--Do you indeed think it is reasonable I should part
with him?'

'With whom?' said Mrs. Stafford.

'Why, one condition which they insist upon is, that I should give up my
poor little one to them, and never ask to see him again. William was the
most urgent for this--William, who used to be so good, so gentle, so
compassionate to every body! Alas! he is now more cruel and relentless
than the rest!'

'So far from it,' said Mrs. Stafford, 'your brother William loves you as
much as ever; he will come and tell you so himself if you will only be
composed, and talk less strangely.'

'To see _me_!' exclaimed she, as if suddenly recovering her
recollection--'Oh! when?--where?--how?'

But again it forsook her; and she continued--

'Ah! he comes perhaps to tell me of the blood he has spilt, and to load
me with reproaches for having obliged him to destroy a friend whom he
once loved. If that is indeed so, why let him come and plunge another
dagger in this poor heart, which has always loved him!'

She was silent a moment, and then languidly went on--

'I thought some time since that I saw him, and Miss Mowbray was with
him; but it was only a dream, for I know he is in Jamaica: and when he
_does_ come home, he will harden his heart against me--he will be my
judge, and sternly will he judge me--he will forget that he is my
brother!'

'Never! my poor Adelina,' cried Godolphin, rushing into the room, 'never
can I forget that I am your brother--never can I cease to feel for you
compassion and tenderness.'

He would have taken her in his arms; but struck by the dreadful
alteration that appeared in her face and figure, he stopt short, and
looking at her with silent horror, seemed incapable of uttering what he
felt.

She knew him; but could neither speak or shed a tear for some moments.
At length, she held out to him her emaciated hand.

'It is _indeed_ William!' said she. 'He seems, too, very sorry for me.
My dear brother, do you then pardon and pity the poor Adelina?'

'Both! both!' answered Godolphin, sobbing, and seating himself by her.
He threw his arms round her, and her pale cheek rested on his bosom,
while her eyes were fixed on his face.

'Stay!' exclaimed she, after a momentary pause, and disengaging herself
suddenly from him--'Stay! I have yet another question, if I dared ask
it! Do you know all? and have you no blood to answer for, on my account?
Will you assure me you will not seek it?'

'For mercy's sake!' said Mrs. Stafford, 'satisfy her, Mr.
Godolphin--satisfy her at once--you see to what is owing this alienation
of her reason.'

'No,' reassumed the afflicted Adelina, 'you need not answer me; I see
you cannot--will not forgive----'

'Name him not, Adelina!' sternly and quickly answered he--'my soul
recoils at his idea! I cannot, I will not promise any thing!'

At this period, Emmeline, who was unwilling to trust the servants in
such a moment, entered with the infant of Lady Adelina sleeping in her
arms.

'See,' said Mrs. Stafford, 'a little unfortunate creature, whose
innocence must surely plead forcibly to you: he comes to join our
intreaties to you to spare his mother!'

Emmeline laid the infant in the lap of Lady Adelina, who was yet unable
to shed a tear. Godolphin beheld it with mingled horror and pity; but
the latter sentiment seemed to predominate; and Emmeline, whose voice
was calculated to go to the heart, began to try it's influence; and
imploring him to be calm, and to promise his sister an eternal oblivion
of the past, she urged every argument that should convince him of it's
necessity, and every motive that could affect his reason or his
compassion.

He gazed on her with reverence and admiration while she spoke, and
seemed greatly affected by what she said. Animated by the hope of
success, her eyes were lightened up with new brilliancy, and her glowing
cheeks and expressive features became more than ever attractive. A
convulsive laugh from Lady Adelina interrupted her, and drew the
attention of Godolphin entirely to his sister. Emmeline, who saw her
reason again forsaking her, took the sleeping baby from her lap. She had
hardly done so, before, trying to rise from her chair, she shrieked
aloud--for again the image of Fitz-Edward, dying by the hand of her
brother, was before her.

'See!' cried she, 'see! there he lies!--he is already expiring! yet
William forgives him not! What? would you strike him again? now! while
he is dying?--Go! cruel, cruel brother!' attempting to put Godolphin
from her--'Go!--Oh! touch me not with those polluted hands, they are
stained with human blood!' A convulsive shudder and a deep sigh seemed
to exhaust all her remaining strength, and she fell back in her chair,
pale and faint; and with fixed, unmeaning eyes, appeared no longer
conscious even of the terrors which pursued her.

But the look of incurable anguish which her features wore; the wild
import of her words; and the sight of the unfortunate child, who seemed
born only to share her wretchedness; could not long be beheld unmoved by
a heart like Godolphin's, which possessed all that tenderness that
distinguishes the truly brave. Again he threw his arms round his sister,
and sobbing, said--

'Hear me, Adelina--hear me and be tranquil! I will promise to be guided
by your excellent friends--I will do nothing that shall give pain to
them or to you!'

'Thank God!' exclaimed Emmeline, 'that you at last hear reason! Remember
this promise is given to us all.'

'It is,' answered Godolphin; 'but try to make poor Adelina sensible of
it.' She no longer understood any thing; but with her eyes shut, and her
hands clasped in each other, was at least quiet.

'I cannot bear it!' continued Godolphin--'I must go for a few moments to
recover myself!' He then left the room, desiring Emmeline to comfort and
compose his sister, who soon afterwards asked hastily what was become of
him?

Emmeline, pleased to find she had a clear recollection of his having
been with her, now told her that he had most solemnly assured them he
would think no more of seeking Fitz-Edward on account of this unhappy
affair. As she seemed still, in fearful apprehension, to doubt the
reality of this promise, Godolphin, who was only in the next room with
Mrs. Stafford, returned, and assured her of his pity, his forbearance
and his forgiveness.

After some farther efforts on the part of Emmeline, and protestations on
that of Godolphin, tears, which had been long denied to Lady Adelina,
came to her relief. She wept, caressed her infant, and blessed and
thanked her brother and her friends. When capable of recollection, she
knew that towards those whom he had once pardoned, he was incapable of
reproach or unkindness; and her mind, eased of the fears which had so
long harrassed it, seemed to be recovering it's tone. Still, however,
the sense of her own incurable unhappiness, her own irretrievable
unworthiness, and the disgrace of having sullied the honour of her
family, and given pain to such a brother, overwhelmed her with grief and
confusion; while her reason, as it at intervals returned, served only to
shew her the abyss into which she had fallen: and she sometimes even
regretted those hours of forgetfulness, when she possessed not the power
of steady reflection, and when the sad reality was obliterated by wild
and imaginary horrors.

[Footnote 1: Without fear and without reproach.]



