

Some few days elapsed before there was any great alteration for the
better in Lady Adelina. But the incessant attention of her friends, the
soothing pity of her brother, and the skill of her physician, slowly
conquered the lurking fever which had so long hung about her; and her
intellects, tho' still disordered at times, were more collected, and
gave reason to hope that she would soon entirely recover.

In the mean time Captain Godolphin communicated to Mrs. Stafford the
resolution he had taken about his sister. He said that she should
renounce for ever all claim on the Trelawny estate, except only the
stipend settled on her as a consideration for the fortune she was to
receive at the death of the dowager Lady Westhaven, and which was only
three hundred a year; a sum which he thought made her but a paltry and
inadequate compensation for having passed two years in the society of
such a man as Trelawny.

He added, that he had a house in the Isle of Wight (almost all the
patrimony his father had been able to give him,) where, as his ship was
now out of commission, he proposed residing himself; and whither he
should insist upon Lady Adelina's retiring, without any future attempt
to see or correspond with Fitz-Edward.

As to the child, he asked if Mrs. Stafford would have the goodness to
see that it was taken care of at some cottage in her neighbourhood,
'till he could adjust matters with the Trelawny family, and put an end
to all those fears which might tempt them to enquire into it's birth;
after which he said he would take it to his own house, and call it a son
of his own; a precaution that would throw an obscurity over the truth
which would hardly ever be removed, when none were particularly
interested to remove it.

These designs he desired Mrs. Stafford to communicate to Lady Adelina;
and as she was obliged to return home in two days, she took the earliest
opportunity of doing so.

To the conditions her brother offered, Lady Adelina thought herself most
happy to consent. The little boy was immediately baptized by the name of
William Godolphin, and his unfortunate mother now began to flatter
herself that her disastrous history might be concealed even from her
elder brother, Lord Westhaven; of whose indignation and resentment she
had ever the most alarming apprehensions. But while the hope of
escaping them by her brother William's generous compassion, gave to her
heavy sorrows some alleviation, they were renewed with extreme
poignancy, by the approaching separation from her inestimable friends.
Mrs. Stafford could no longer delay her return to her family; and
Emmeline, who now saw Lady Adelina out of danger and in the protection
of her brother, was desirous of accompanying her back to Woodfield.

Lady Adelina ineffectually tried to bear this early departure with some
degree of fortitude and resolution. Nor was it _her_ heart alone that
felt desolate and unhappy at it's approach--That of her brother, had
received an impression from the mental and personal perfections of
Emmeline, which being at first deep, had soon become indelible; and
ignorant of her engagement, he had indulged it till he found it no
longer possible for him to forbear making her the first object of his
life, and that the value of his existence depended wholly on her.

Emmeline was yet quite unconscious of this: but Mrs. Stafford had seen
it almost from the first moment of her seeing Godolphin. In their
frequent conversation, she observed that the very name of Emmeline had
the power of fascination; that he was never weary of hearing her
praises; that whenever he thought himself unobserved, his eyes were in
pursuit of her; while fondly gazing on her face, he seemed to drink deep
draughts of intoxicating passion.

Mrs. Stafford, who knew what ardent and fatal love, such excellence of
person and understanding might produce in a heart susceptible of all
their power, was alarmed for the happiness of this amiable man; and with
regret saw him nourishing an affection which she thought must be
entirely hopeless.

These apprehensions, every hour's observation encreased. Yet Mrs.
Stafford determined not to communicate them to Emmeline; but to put an
end to the flattering delusion which led on Godolphin to indulge his
passion, by telling him, as soon as possible, of the engagement Emmeline
had formed with Mr. Delamere.

Accident soon furnished her with an opportunity. While they were all
sitting together after dinner, a packet of letters was brought in, and
among others which were forwarded to Mrs. Stafford from Woodfield, was
one for Emmeline.

Mrs. Stafford gave it to her, saying--'From France, by the post mark?'

Emmeline replied that it was. She changed colour as she opened it.

'From Mr. Delamere?' enquired Mrs. Stafford.

'No,' answered she, 'it is from Lady Westhaven. Your brother and her
Ladyship are well,' continued she, addressing herself to Mr. Godolphin,
'and are at Paris; where they propose staying 'till Lady Montreville and
Miss Delamere join them as they come to England.'

'And when are they expected?' said Godolphin.

'In about a month,' replied Emmeline. 'But Lord and Lady Westhaven do
not propose to return 'till next spring--they only pass a few days all
together at Paris.'

'And where is Mr. Delamere wandering to?' significantly and smilingly
asked Mrs. Stafford.

'Lady Westhaven says only,' answered Emmeline, blushing and casting down
her eyes, 'that he has left Lady Montreville, and is, they believe, gone
to Geneva.'

'However,' reassumed Mrs. Stafford, 'we shall undoubtedly see him in
England in March.'

Emmeline, in still greater embarrassment, answered two or three other
questions which Godolphin asked her about his brother, and soon after
left the room.

Godolphin, who saw there was something relative to Delamere with which
he was unacquainted, had a confused idea immediately occur to him of his
attachment: and the pain it gave him was so acute, that he wished at
once to know whether it was well founded.

'Why does Mr. Delamere certainly return in March?' said he, addressing
himself to Mrs. Stafford, 'rather than with his mother?'

'To fulfil his engagement,' gravely and coldly replied she.

'Of what nature is it?' asked he.

Mrs. Stafford then related the history of Delamere's long and violent
passion for Emmeline; and the reluctant consent he had wrung from Lord
and Lady Montreville, together with the promise obtained from Miss
Mowbray.

While Mrs. Stafford was making this recital, she saw, by the variations
of Godolphin's countenance, that she had too truly guessed the state of
his heart. Expressive as his features were, it was not in his power to
conceal what he felt in being convinced that he had irrecoverably fixed
his affections on a woman who was the destined wife of another: and
awaking from the soft visions which Hope had offered, to certain
despondence, he found himself too cruelly hurt to be able to continue
the conversation; and after a few faint efforts, which only betrayed his
internal anguish, he hurried away.

Such, however, was the opinion Mrs. Stafford conceived of his honour and
his understanding, that she had no apprehension that he would attempt
imparting to the heart of Emmeline any portion of that pain with which
his own was penetrated; and she hoped that absence and reflection,
together with the conviction of it's being hopeless, would conquer this
infant passion before it could gather strength wholly to ruin his
repose.

She was glad that their departure was so near; and hastened it as much
as possible. The short interval was passed in mournful silence on the
part of Godolphin--on that of Lady Adelina, in tears and regret; while
Emmeline, who was herself sensible of great pain in the approaching
parting, struggled to appear chearful; and Mrs. Stafford attempted, tho'
without much success, to reconcile them all to a separation which was
become as necessary as it was inevitable.

At length the hired coach in which they were to return to Woodfield was
at the door.

Lady Adelina, unable to speak to either of them, brought her little boy
in her arms, and passionately kissing him, gave him into those of
Emmeline. Then taking a hand of each of her friends, she pressed them to
her throbbing heart, and hastened to conceal the violence of her sorrow
in her own room.

Godolphin approached to take leave. He kissed the hand of Mrs. Stafford,
and inarticulately expressed his thanks for her goodness to his sister.

'I know,' continued he, 'I need not recommend to you this poor infant:
the same generosity which prompted you to save his mother, will
effectually plead for him, and secure for him your protection 'till I
can take him to that of his own family. And you, Miss Mowbray,' said he,
turning to Emmeline and taking her hand--'most amiable, loveliest of
human creatures! where shall I find words to thank you as I ought?'

His emotion was too great for utterance. Emmeline felt it but too
sensibly; and hastening into the coach to hide how much she was herself
affected, she could only say--

'All happiness attend you, Sir! Remind Lady Adelina of my hopes of soon
hearing from her.'

Mrs. Stafford being then seated, and the servant who had been hired to
attend the infant following her, the coach drove from the door.
Godolphin pursued it with his eyes to the end of the street; and then,
as if deprived of all that made life desirable, he gave himself up to
languor and despondence, afraid of examining his own heart, least his
reason should condemn an inclination, which, however hopeless, he could
not resolve to conquer.

But while he found charms in the indulgence of his unhappy love, he
determined never to disturb the peace of it's object. But rather to
suffer in silence, than to give pain to a heart so generous and sensible
as her's, merely for the melancholy pleasure of knowing that she pitied
him.

As soon as Lady Adelina could bear the journey, they departed together
to his house in the Isle of Wight; where he left her, and went in search
of Mrs. Bancraft, the sister of Trelawny, of whom he enquired where
Trelawny himself might be found.

This woman, apprehensive that he meditated a reconciliation between her
brother and his wife, which it was so much her interest to prevent,
refused for some time to give him the information he desired. Having
however at length convinced her that he had no wish to renew a union
which had been productive only of misery to his sister, she told him
that Mr. Trelawny was returned to England, and lived at a house hired in
the name of her husband, a few miles from London.

There Godolphin sought him; and found the unhappy man sunk into a state
of perpetual and unconscious intoxication; in which Bancraft, the
husband of his sister, encouraged him, foreseeing that it must soon end
in his son's being possessed of an income, to which the meanness of his
own origin, and former condition, made him look forward with anxious
avidity.

It was difficult to make Trelawny, sinking into idiotism, comprehend
either who Godolphin was, or the purport of his business. But Bancraft,
more alive to his own interest, presently understood, that on condition
of his entering into bonds of separation, Lady Adelina would relinquish
the greater part of her claim on the Trelawny estate; and he undertook
to have the deeds signed as soon as they could be drawn up. In a few
days therefore Godolphin saw Trelawny's part of them compleated; and
returned to Lady Adelina, satisfied in having released her from an
engagement, which, since he had seen Trelawny, had rendered her in his
eyes an object of tenderer pity; and in having acquitted himself
according to his strict sense of honour, by causing her to relinquish
all the advantages Trelawny's fortune offered, except those to which she
had an absolute right.

This affair being adjusted, he again resigned himself to the mournful
but pleasing contemplations which had occupied him ever since he had
heard of Emmeline's engagement. While Lady Adelina, whose intellects
were now restored, but who was lost in profound melancholy, saw too
evidently the state of her brother's heart; and could not but lament
that his tenderness for her had been the means of involving him in a
passion, which the great merit of it's object, and his own sensibility,
convinced her must be incurable.

The letters of Emmeline were the only consolation she was capable of
receiving. They gave her favourable accounts of her child, and of the
continued affection of her inestimable friends. Whenever one of these
letters was brought, Godolphin eagerly watched her while she was reading
it; and then, faultering and impatient, asked if all were well; and if
Mr. Delamere was yet returned? She sometimes gave him the letters to
peruse; after which he generally fell into long absence, broken only by
deep drawn and involuntary sighs--symptoms which Lady Adelina knew too
well to doubt of the cause.

In the mean time Mrs. Stafford and Emmeline visited every day their
innocent charge, who passed for the child of one of Emmeline's friends
gone to the West Indies. Emmeline insensibly grew so fond of him, that
she was uneasy if any accident prevented her daily visit; and her friend
sometimes laughingly reproached her with the robbery little William
committed on her time.

When they were alone, their conversation frequently turned on Lady
Adelina and her brother. The subject, tho' melancholy, was ever a
favourite with them both; and perhaps the more so because it led them to
mournful reflections--for Mrs. Stafford was unhappy, and Emmeline was
not gay; nor were her spirits greatly heightened by finding that in
spite of herself she thought as much of the brother as the sister, and
with a degree of softness and complacency which could not be favourable
to her happiness.

When she first discovered in Godolphin those admirable qualities of
heart and understanding which he so eminently possessed, she asked
herself whether she might indulge the admiration they excited without
prejudice to him whom she considered as her husband? And she fancied
that she might safely give him that esteem which his tenderness to his
unhappy sister, the softness of his manners, the elegance of his mind,
and the generosity of his heart, could hardly fail of extorting from the
most indifferent observer.

But insensibly his idea obtruded itself more frequently on her
imagination; and she determined to attempt to forget him, and no longer
to allow any partiality to rob Delamere of that pure and sincere
attachment with which he would expect her to meet him at the altar. It
was now long since she had heard from him; but she accounted for it by
supposing that he was rambling about, and she knew that letters were
frequently lost.

It was at this time something more than two years since they had first
met at Mowbray Castle, and in a few weeks Delamere would complete his
twenty-first year--a period to which Lord Montreville had long looked
forward with anxious solicitude. And now he could not but think with
bitterness that his son would not be present to animate the joy of his
dependants at this period; but was kept in another country, in the vain
hope of extinguishing a passion which could not be indulged without
rendering abortive all the pains his Lordship had taken to restore his
family to the eminent rank it had formerly borne in his country.

To Sir Richard Crofts, his sons had communicated the success of those
plans, by which they had sown, in the irritable mind of Delamere,
jealousy and mistrust of Emmeline; and he failed not to animate and
encourage their endeavours, while he used his power over the mind of
Lord Montreville to limit the bounty and lessen the affection his
Lordship was disposed to shew her as the daughter of his brother.

She received regularly her quarterly payment, but she received no more;
and instead of hearing, on those occasions, from Lord Montreville
himself, she had twice only a methodical letter from Maddox, the London
steward.

This might, however, be merely accidental; and Emmeline was far from
supposing that her uncle was estranged from her; nor could she guess
that the malice of Mrs. Ashwood, and the artifices of the Crofts', had
occasioned that estrangement.

Lord Montreville rather connived at than participated in their
ungenerous proceedings; and as if fearful of trusting his own ideas of
integrity with a plan which so evidently militated against them, he was
determined to take advantage of their endeavours, without enquiring too
minutely into their justice or candour. Sir Richard had assured him that
Mr. Delamere was in a great measure weaned from his attachment; and that
Mr. Crofts was almost sure, that if their meeting could be prevented for
a few months longer, there would be nothing more to fear from this long
and unfortunate prepossession.

Crofts himself, who had at length torn himself from his bride to pave
the way for his being received by her family as her husband, soon
appeared, and confirmed all this. He told Lord Montreville that Delamere
had conceived suspicions of Emmeline's conduct, (tho' he knew not from
what cause) that had at first excited the most uneasy jealousy, but
which had at length subsided with his love; that he had regained his
spirits; and, when he left his mother and sister, seemed resolved to
make a vigorous effort to expel from his mind a passion he was ashamed
of having so long indulged.

In saying all this, Crofts rather attended to what his Lordship wished
to hear, than to what was really the truth. He knew that a meeting
between Delamere and Emmeline would probably at once explain all the
unworthy artifices which had been used to divide them, and render those
artifices abortive. He therefore told Lord Montreville, that to prevent
all probability of a relapse, it would be advisable to remove Emmeline
to some place where Delamere could not meet her: and his Lordship,
forgetting at once all the obligations he owed her, thought only of
following this advice.

Embarrassed, however, himself with public business, he was unable to
give to these domestic politics all the attention which they demanded.
He threw himself more than ever into the power of the Crofts', to whose
policy he left it to contrive the means, between the months of November
and March, of raising an invincible barrier between his son and his
niece.

Tho' Delamere's being of age encreased the difficulties of this
undertaking, Crofts having no scruples about the methods he was to
pursue, had no doubt of accomplishing his end: and to stimulate his
endeavours, he needed only the particular advantages which would accrue
to himself from the pardon and reception which he hoped to obtain from
Lord Montreville and his family.

Every engine therefore that ambition, avarice, malice and cunning could
employ, was now put in motion against the character and the peace of the
unprotected and unsuspicious Emmeline.

In conscious innocence and unsullied purity, she dreamed not that she
had an enemy on earth; for of Mrs. Ashwood, now Mrs. James Crofts, she
only remembered that she had once been obliged to her. The little,
malicious envy which had given her some pain at the time it was shewn,
she now no longer recollected; and tho' she always continued to dislike
James Crofts, yet his impertinence she had forgiven, and had written in
the usual form to congratulate them both on their marriage.

Of Delamere, she heard nothing; but imputing his silence to his frequent
change of place, she conceived no anger against him on that account; and
still felt herself bound to keep from her mind, as much as possible, the
intrusive image of Godolphin.



