

Whatever resolution Emmeline might form to drive from her heart those
dangerous partialities which would be fatal to her repose, she found it
impossible to be accomplished while Lady Adelina's frequent letters
spoke only of the generous tenderness and excellent qualities of her
brother. Of what else, indeed, could she speak, in a solitude where his
goodness made all her consolation and his conversation all her pleasure?
where he dedicated to her all his time, and thought of procuring for her
every alleviation to her retirement which books and domestic amusements
afforded? while he taught her still to respect herself; and by his
unwearied friendship convincing her that she had still much to lose,
made her life receive in her own eyes a value it would otherwise have
lost; and prevented her relapsing into that unhappy state of
self-condemnation which makes the sufferer careless of the future. He
thought, that situated as she was, solitude was her only choice; but to
render it as happy as her circumstances allowed, was his continual care:
and tho' oppressive sorrow still lay heavy on her heart; tho' it still
ached with tenderness and regret towards an object whom she had sworn to
think of, to speak of no more; her gratitude and affection towards her
brother were as lively, as if its acute feelings had never felt the
benumbing hand of despair.

In the total sequestration from the world in which she lived, she had no
other topic to dwell upon than her brother, and she gave it all its
force. Perfectly acquainted, however, with Emmeline's engagements, she
never ventured to mention the passion which she was too well assured
Godolphin felt; but she still, almost unknown to herself, cherished a
lurking hope that her connection with Delamere might be dissolved, and
that her lovely friend was destined to bless her beloved brother.

This distant hope was warm enough to animate her pen in his praise; and
Emmeline, tho' every letter she received made on her mind a deeper
impression of the merit of Godolphin, yet found such painful pleasure in
reading them, that she was unhappy if at the usual periods they did not
regularly arrive.

She tried to persuade herself, that the satisfaction she felt in reading
these letters arose purely from the delight natural to every uncorrupted
mind in contemplating a character honourable to human nature. But
accustomed to examine narrowly her own heart, she could not long impose
upon herself; and notwithstanding all her endeavours to stifle it, she
still found the idea of Godolphin mixing itself with all her thoughts,
and embittering the prospect of her certain marriage with Delamere.

In the answers Emmeline gave her friend, she related whatever she
thought likely to amuse the fair recluse; gave a regular account of her
little charge; but avoided punctiliously the least mention of
Fitz-Edward.

Fitz-Edward had received from Mrs. Stafford an account of all that had
passed at Bath, except the pains which had been taken to prevent any
meeting between him and Godolphin. But notwithstanding her cautious
silence on that head, Fitz-Edward, who knew Godolphin well, could hardly
be persuaded not to insist on his taking his chance of depriving him of
a life which he said he had deserved to lose, and could little brook
being supposed to hold on courtesy. Nothing but his consideration for
the unhappy Lady Adelina prevented his pursuing the sanguinary projects
that agitated his mind. To her peace he owed it to conquer them; and
while he was yet struggling against that sense of honour which impelled
him to give Godolphin imaginary reparation, by allowing him an
opportunity of putting an end to _his_ existence or losing his own, his
brother, Lord Clancarryl, wrote to desire his attendance in Ireland on
some family business of importance; a summons, which after some
hesitation, Mrs. Stafford and Miss Mowbray prevailed with him to obey.

Before he went, his eager and affecting entreaties prevailed on Mrs.
Stafford to let him see his son, whom he embraced with an ardour of
affection of which the fair friends believed so gay and fashionable a
man incapable.

The errors of Fitz-Edward, however, were not those of the heart. Among
the dissipation of fashion and the indulgences of libertinism, his heart
was still sensible, and his integrity retrievable. He felt, therefore,
with great keenness, the injury he had done Lady Adelina; and desirous
of making all the reparation he could to the infant, he again placed in
the hands of Emmeline, a will by which he made it his heir, and
recommended it to the protection of Godolphin, whom he besought to
consider as his nephew, the son of a man whom he had once loved, and who
had dearly paid for having forfeited all claim to his friendship. When
he was departed, nothing seemed likely to interrupt the tranquillity of
Emmeline but her encreasing apprehensions for Mrs. Stafford and her
children. The derangement of Stafford's affairs, and his wife's
unavailing efforts to ward off the ruin which he seemed obstinately bent
on incurring, were every day more visible: while his capricious and
unreasonable temper, and a strange opinion of his own sagacity, which
would never allow him to own himself in the wrong, made him seek to load
his wife with the blame of those misfortunes which he had voluntarily
sought, and now as obdurately refused to avoid while it was yet in his
power.

Mrs. Stafford, who saw too plainly that the destruction of their fortune
which she had so long dreaded was now with hasty strides advancing, yet
endeavoured to convince him of his infatuation; but he still improved
his house and garden, still schemed away all the money he could raise or
gain credit for, and still repaid with rudeness and insult her anxious
solicitude to save him.

In Emmeline, she ever found pity and tenderness; but pity and tenderness
was all she had to bestow. The affairs of Stafford required interest and
money; and Emmeline could command neither. Lord Montreville now took no
other notice of her, than to remit her quarterly stipend by the hands of
his steward; and tho' he had promised to double it, that promise yet
remained unfulfilled.

It was at this time near the end of November, and the mornings were cold
and gloomy: but Emmeline, however delicate in her frame, had a
constitution which had not, by early and false indulgences, been
unfitted for the duties of life; and to personal inconvenience she was
always indifferent when the service of those she loved engaged her to
brave fatigue or cold. She therefore still continued her morning visit
to Woodbury Forest, where she generally past an hour with little
William; and in his improving features and interesting smiles, loved to
trace his resemblance to his mother. Lady Adelina was very like her
brother; and the little boy was not the less tenderly caressed for the
similitude she saw to them both.

The appearance of rain had one morning detained her at home later than
usual. She went, however, about eleven o'clock; and was busied in
playing with the infant, who began now to know her, and was therefore
more attractive, when, while she yet held him in her arms, she heard the
woman of the house, who was in the outward room, suddenly
exclaim--'Indeed Sir you cannot go in--pray--I beg your honour!' There
was hardly time for Emmeline to feel surprise at this bustle, before the
door opened, and Delamere stood before her! In his countenance was an
expression compounded of rage, fierceness and despair, which extorted
from Emmeline an involuntary shriek! Unable to arise, she remained
motionless in her chair, clasping the baby to her bosom: Delamere seemed
trying to stifle his anger in contempt; vengeance, disdain, and pride,
were struggling for superiority: while with his eyes sternly turned upon
Emmeline, and smiling indignantly, he exclaimed--'Till I _saw_ this----'
inarticulately and tremulously he spoke--'till I _saw_ this, all the
evidence they brought me was insufficient to cure my blind attachment.
But now--oh! infamy--madness--damnation! It _is_ then possible--It _is_
then true! But what is it to me? Torn--torn for ever from this outraged
heart--never, never shall this sight blast me again!--But what?'
continued he, speaking with more quickness, 'what? for Fitz-Edward! for
the infamous plunderer of his friend's happiness! However, Madam, on you
I intrude no longer. Oh! lost--lost--wretched!'--He could not go on; but
in the speechless agony of contending passions he leaned his head
against the frame of the door near which he stood, and gazed wildly on
Emmeline; who, pale as death, and trembling like a leaf, still sat
before him unable to recall her scattered spirits.

He waited a moment, gasping for breath, and as if he had still some
feeble expectation of hearing her speak. But the child which she held in
her arms was like a basilisk to his sight, and made in his opinion all
vindication impossible. Again conviction appeared to drive him to
desperation; and looking in a frantic manner round the room, as if
entirely bereft of reason, he dashed his hands furiously against his
head, and running, or rather flying out of the house, he immediately
disappeared.

In terror and astonishment, Emmeline remained immovable and speechless.
She almost doubted whether this was any other than a fearful dream,
'till the woman of the house, and the maid who attended on the child,
ran into the room frightened--'Lord! Madam,' cried the woman, 'what is
the matter with the young gentleman?'

'I know not,' answered Emmeline, faintly--'I know not! Where is he now?'

'He's run away into the wood again like any mad,' answered the woman.

'And from whence,' enquired Emmeline, 'did he come?'

'Why, Miss,' said she, 'I was a going out cross our garden to hang out
my cloaths; so up a comes to the hedge side, an a says--Good woman, pray
be'nt here a lady here as comes from Woodfield? one Miss Mowbray?--I
thought how he looked oddish as 'twere about the eyes; but howsever
thinking no harm, I says yes. So he runs up to the door, and I called to
un, to say as I'd come in and let you know; but before I could get thro'
the wicket, whisk he was in the kitchen; then I tried agin to stop un,
but I were as good try to stop the wind.'

The agitation and uneasiness of Emmeline encreased rather than subsided.
She looked so pale, and with so much difficulty drew her breath, that
the women were alarmed least she should faint: and one of them persuaded
her to swallow something, while the other ran out to see if the person
who had so terrified her was yet in sight. But no traces of him were
visible: and after a few moments, Emmeline recalling her presence of
mind, and feeling proudly conscious of her own innocence and integrity,
recovered in some degree her spirits and resolution.

That Delamere should be in England did not greatly astonish tho' it
grieved her; but that he should have conceived such strange suspicions
of her and Fitz-Edward, equally surprised and distressed her; since,
had she an opportunity of undeceiving him, which he did not seem willing
to allow her, she could not relate the truth but by betraying the
confidence of her unfortunate friend, and embittering that life she had
incurred such hazards to preserve. As soon as she had apparently
recovered from the shock of this abrupt intrusion, she was desirous of
returning to Woodfield; anxious to know if Delamere had been there, or
by what means he had been enabled to find her at the cottage in the
forest. The women, who fancied the gentleman they had seen was a lunatic
who might lay in wait to hurt her on her way home, would not suffer her
to set out 'till they had called a woodcutter from the forest to
accompany her. Then, slowly and with difficulty, she returned home;
where she heard from Mrs. Stafford that Delamere had neither been there
or sent thither. This information encreased her wonder and her disquiet.
She related to Mrs. Stafford the distressing interview of the morning;
who, having seen frequent instances of those excesses of which Delamere
was capable, heard the relation with concern and apprehension.



