

Some days were passed by Emmeline in painful conjectures on what
measures Delamere would take, and in uncertainty what she ought to do
herself. Sometimes she thought of writing to Lord Montreville: but
against that Mrs. Stafford remonstrated; representing, that as she was
undoubtedly the injured person, in having been insulted by suspicions so
unworthy, she should leave it wholly to Delamere to discover and recant
his error; which, if he refused on cooler reflection to do, she would be
fortunate in escaping from an engagement with a man who had so little
command of his own temper, so little reliance on her principles, as to
be driven on a mere suspicion into rudeness and insult.

Greatly mortified at finding it possible for Delamere to think so
injuriously of her, and depressed by a thousand uneasy apprehensions,
she yielded implicitly to the counsel of her friend. But of her counsel
and consolation she was now on the point of being deprived: Stafford,
who had been some time in London, sent an express to fetch his wife
thither a few days after the interview between Emmeline and Delamere.
His affairs were now growing desperate: James Crofts demanded immediate
payment of a sum of money belonging to his wife, that was left her by
her father, and which she had 'till now suffered to remain in the hands
of her brother. Stafford had made no provision to pay it: his boundless
profusion had dissipated all the ready money he could command; and this
claim of his sister's, which James Crofts seemed determined to urge,
would he knew be the signal for every other creditor to beset him with
demands he had no means of discharging.

Tho' Mrs. Stafford had long tho' vainly implored him to stop in his wild
career, and had represented to him all the evils which were now about to
overtake him, she could not see their near approach without an attempt
again to rescue him. And he was accustomed in every difficulty to have
recourse to her; tho' while he felt none, he scorned and even resented
her efforts to keep them at a distance. He now fancied that her
application might prevail on James Crofts to drop a suit he had
commenced against him: she hastily therefore set out for London; leaving
to Emmeline the care of her children; who promised, by the utmost
attention to them, to obviate part of the inconvenience of such a
journey.

It was unhappily, however, not only inconvenient but fruitless. Mr. and
Mrs. James Crofts were inexorable. The suit was tried; Stafford was
cast; and nothing remained for him but either to pay the money or to be
exposed to the hazard of losing his property and his liberty. His
conduct had so much injured his credit, that to borrow, it was
impossible. Mrs. Stafford attempted therefore to divest herself of part
of her own fortune to assist him with the money: but her trustees were
not to be moved; and nothing but despair seemed darkening round the head
of the unfortunate Stafford.

Mrs. Stafford saw too evidently that to be in the power of James Crofts,
was to trust to avarice, meanness and malignity; and she trembled to
reflect that her husband was now wholly at his mercy. The additional
motives he had to use that power rigorously she knew not: she was
ignorant that the business had so eagerly been pushed to a crisis, not
merely by the avidity of James Crofts to possess the money, but also by
the directions of Sir Richard, who hoped by this means to drive the
family with whom Emmeline resided to another country; where Delamere
might find access to her so difficult, that he might never have an
opportunity of explaining the cause of his estrangement, or of hearing
her vindication.

It was now that Mrs. Stafford remembered the frequent offers of service
which she had repeatedly received from Lord Montreville; and to him she
determined to apply. She hoped that he might be induced to influence the
Crofts' family to give Mr. Stafford time, and to desist from the
violence and precipitation with which they pursued him. She even fancied
that his Lordship would be glad of an opportunity so easily to realize
those offers he had so liberally made; and full of these expectations,
she prepared to become a solicitress for favours to a statesman. She
felt humbled and mortified at the cruel necessity that compelled her to
it; but her children's interest conquering her reluctance, she addressed
a letter to Lord Montreville, and received a very polite answer, in
which he desired the honour of seeing her at two o'clock the following
day; an hour, when he said he should be entirely disengaged. She might
as well, however, have attended at his levee; for tho' punctual to the
hour when he was to be disengaged, she found two rooms adjoining to that
where his Lordship was, occupied by a variety of figures; some of whose
faces, were faces of negociation and equality, but more, whose
expression of fearful suspence marked them for those of petitioners and
dependants. Those of the former description were separately called to an
audience; and each, after a longer or shorter stay, retired; while Mrs.
Stafford, tho' with an heart but ill at ease for observation, could not
help fancying she discerned in their looks the success of their
respective treaties.

As soon as these gentlemen were all departed, Mrs. Stafford, who had
already waited almost three hours, was introduced into the study; where,
with many gracious bows and smiling apologies, Lord Montreville received
her.

Sir Richard Crofts had that morning warmly represented to his Lordship
the necessity of the Staffords' going abroad and taking Emmeline with
them. Lord Montreville knew that Delamere was returned, and was
embroiled with Emmeline; he was therefore eager enough to follow advice
which appeared so necessary, and to promote any plan which might prevent
a renewal of the attachment. He enquired not into the cause of this
estrangement, satisfied with it's effect; and had secretly determined
to give Mrs. Stafford no assistance in the endeavours she was using to
keep her family from dispersion and distress.

But statesman as he was, he could not entirely forget that he _once_
felt as other men; and he could not hear, without some emotion, the
melancholy description that Mrs. Stafford gave of the impending ruin of
her family and all it's fearful consequences: which she did with so much
clear simplicity, yet with so much proper dignity, that he found his
resolution shaken; and recollecting _that he had a conscience_, was
about to ask it by what right he assumed the power of rendering an
innocent family wandering exiles, merely to save himself from a supposed
possible inconvenience.

But while every lingering principle of goodness and generosity was
rising in the bosom of his Lordship to assist the suit of Mrs. Stafford,
a servant entered hastily and announced the Duke of N----. His Grace of
course waited not in the anti-room, but was immediately introduced.

Lord Montreville then civilly apologized to Mrs. Stafford for being
unable to conclude the business; adding, that if she would see Sir
Richard Crofts the next day, he would take care it should be settled to
her satisfaction. She withdrew with a heavy heart; and feeling infinite
reluctance in the proposed application to Sir Richard Crofts, she
employed the whole afternoon in attempting to move, in favour of her
husband, some of those friends who had formerly professed the most
unbounded and disinterested friendship for him and his family.

Of many of these, the doors were shut against her; others affected the
utmost concern, and lamented that their little power and limited
fortunes did not allow them to assist in repairing the misfortunes they
deplored: some told her how long they had foreseen Mr. Stafford's
embarrassments, and how destructive building and scheming were to a
moderate fortune; while others made vague proffers of inadequate
services, which on farther conversation she found they never intended to
perform if unluckily she had accepted their offers. In all, she saw too
plainly that they looked on Mr. Stafford's affairs as desperate; and in
their coldness and studied civility, already felt all the misery and
mortification of reduced circumstances.

With encreased anguish, she was now compelled to go, on the following
day, to Sir Richard Crofts; whom she knew only from Emmeline's
description.

He also, in imitation of his patron, had his anti-chamber filled with
soliciting faces. She waited not quite so long, indeed, for an audience,
but with infinitely less patience. At length, however, she was shewn
into the apartment where Sir Richard transacted business.

Bloated prosperity was in his figure, supercilious scorn in his eyes: he
rose half off his seat, and slightly inclined his head on her entrance.

'Madam, your servant--please to sit down.'

'I waited on you, Sir Richard, to--'

'I beg your pardon, Madam. But as I am perfectly acquainted, and
informed, and aware of the business, there is no occasion or necessity
to give you the trouble to repeat, and dwell upon, and explain it. It is
not, I find, convenient, or suitable, or commodious, for Mr. Stafford to
pay to my son James, who has married his (Mr. Stafford's) sister, that
part, and proportion, and residue, of her fortune, which her father at
his death gave, bequeathed, and left to her.'

'It is not only inconvenient, Sir,' answered Mrs. Stafford, 'but
impossible, I fear, for him to do it immediately; and this is what I
wished to speak to you upon.'

'I am aware, and informed, and apprized, Madam, of what you would say. I
am sorry it is as you say so inconvenient, and impracticable, and
impossible. However, Madam, my way in these cases is to go very plainly,
and straitly, and directly to the point; therefore I will chalk out, and
describe, and point out to you a line of conduct, which if you chuse to
follow, and adopt, and pursue, it appears to me that all may be
adjusted, settled, and put to rights.'

'You will oblige me, Sir Richard, by doing so.'

'Well then, it is this--As it appears, and is evident, and visible, that
you have not the money in question, you must immediately sell, and
dispose of, and make into money, your house and effects in Dorsetshire,
and after paying, and satisfying, and discharging the debt to my son
James, you must (as I understand your husband is besides deeply in
debt,) withdraw, retire, and remove to France, or to Normandy, or
Switzerland, or some cheap country, 'till your affairs come round, and
are retrieved, and accommodated and adjusted.'

'This we might have done, Sir Richard, without troubling you with the
present application.'

'No, Madam, you might _not_. I assure you I have talked, and reasoned,
and argued some time with Mr. James Crofts, before I could induce, and
prevail upon, and dispose him to wait, and remain, and continue unpaid,
until this arrangement and disposition could take place. He wants the
money, Madam, for a particular purpose; and tho' from my heart I grieve,
and lament, and deplore the necessity of the measure, I do assure you,
Madam, nothing else will give you any chance of winding up, compleating,
and terminating the business before us. You will therefore, Madam,
think, and consider, and reflect on it's necessity, and give your final
answer to my son James, who will wait for it only 'till to-morrow
morning.'

He then rang his bell; and saying he had an appointment with Lord
Montreville, who must already have waited for him, he made a cold bow
and hastened out of the room.



