

Early the next morning, Emmeline arose; and looking towards the sea, saw
a still encreasing tempest gathering visibly over it. She wandered over
the house; which tho' not large was chearful and elegant, and she
fancied every thing in it bore testimony to the taste and temper of its
master. The garden charmed her still more; surrounded by copse-wood and
ever-greens, and which seemed equally adapted to use and pleasure. The
country behind it, tho' divested of its foliage and verdure, appeared
more beautiful than any she had seen since she left Wales; and with
uncommon avidity she enjoyed, even amid the heavy gloom of an impending
storm, the great and magnificent spectacle afforded by the sea. By
reminding her of her early pleasures at Mowbray Castle, it brought back
a thousand half-obliterated and agreeable, tho' melancholy images to her
mind; while its grandeur gratified her taste for the sublime.

As she was indulging these contemplations, the wind suddenly blew with
astonishing violence; and before Mrs. Stafford arose, the sea was become
so tempestuous and impracticable, that eagerly as she wished to return
to her children she could not think of braving it.

Godolphin had seen Emmeline wandering along the cliff, and had
resolutely denied himself the pleasure of joining her; for from what had
passed the evening before, he began to doubt his own power to forbear
speaking to her of the subject that filled his heart.

They now met at breakfast; and Emmeline was charmed with her walk, tho'
she had been driven from it by the turbulence of the weather, which by
this time had arisen to an hurricane. When their breakfast ended, Mrs.
Stafford followed Lady Adelina, who wanted to consult her on something
that related to the little boy; Godolphin went out to give some orders;
and Emmeline retired to a bow window which looked towards the sea.

Could she have divested her mind of its apprehensions that what formed
for her a magnificent and sublime scene brought shipwreck and
destruction to many others, she would have been highly pleased with a
sight of the ocean in its present tremendous state. Lost in
contemplating the awful spectacle, she did not see or hear Godolphin;
who imagining she had left the room with his sister, had returned, and
with his arms crossed, and his eyes fixed on her face, stood on the
other side of the window like a statue.

The gust grew more vehement, and deafened her with it's fury; while the
mountainous waves it had raised, burst thundering against the rocks and
seemed to shake their very foundation. Emmeline, at the picture her
imagination drew of their united powers of desolation, shuddered
involuntarily and sighed.

'What disturbs Miss Mowbray?' said Godolphin.

Emmeline, unwilling to acknowledge that she had been so extremely absent
as not to know he was in the room, answered, without expressing her
surprise to see him there--'I was thinking how fatal this storm which we
are contemplating, may be to the fortunes and probably the lives of
thousands.'

'The gale,' returned Godolphin, 'is heavy, but by no means of such fatal
power as you apprehend. I have been at sea in several infinitely more
violent, and shall probably be in many others.'

'I hope not,' answered Emmeline, without knowing what she said--'Surely
you do not mean it?'

'A professional man,' said he, smiling, and flattered by the eagerness
with which she spoke, 'has, you know, no will of his own. I certainly
should not seek danger; but it is not possible in such service as ours
to avoid it.'

'Why then do you not quit it?'

'If I intended to give you a high idea of my _prudence_, I should say,
because I am a younger brother. But to speak honestly, that is not my
only motive; my fortune, limited as it is, is enough for all my wishes,
and will probably suffice for any I shall _now_ ever form; but a man of
my age ought not surely to waste in torpid idleness, or trifling
dissipation, time that may be usefully employed. Besides, I love the
profession to which I have been brought up, and, by engaging in which, I
owe a life to my country if ever it should be called for.'

'God forbid it ever should!' said Emmeline, with quickness; 'for then,'
continued she, hesitating and blushing, 'what would poor Lady Adelina
do? and what would become of my dear little boy?'

Godolphin, charmed yet pained by this artless expression of sensibility,
and thrown almost off his guard by the idea of not being wholly
indifferent to her, answered mournfully--'To them, indeed, my life may
be of some value; but to myself it is of none. Ah, Miss Mowbray! it
might have been worth preserving had I----But wherefore presume I to
trouble you on a subject so hopeless? I know not what has tempted me to
intrude on your thoughts the incoherences of a mind ill at ease. Pardon
me--and suffer not my folly to deprive me of the happiness of being your
friend, which is all I will ever pretend to.'

He turned away, and hastened out of the room; leaving Emmeline in such
confusion that it was not 'till Mrs. Stafford came to call her to Lady
Adelina's dressing-room, that she remembered where she was, and the
necessity of recollecting her scattered thoughts. When they met at
dinner, she could not encounter the eyes of Godolphin without the
deepest blushes: Lady Adelina, given wholly up to the idea of their
approaching separation, and Mrs. Stafford, occupied by uneasiness of her
own, did not attend to the singularity of her manner.

The latter had never beheld such a tempest as was now raging; and she
could not look towards the sea, whose high and foaming billows were
breaking so near them, without shivering at the terrifying recollection,
that in a very few hours her children, all she held dear on earth, would
be exposed to this capricious and furious element. Tho' of the steadiest
resolution in any trial that merely regarded herself, she was a coward
when these dear objects of her fondness were in question; and she could
not help expressing to Mr. Godolphin some part of her apprehensions.

'As I have gained some credit,' answered he, 'for my sagacity in
foreseeing the gale, I might perhaps as well not hazard the loss of it,
by another prophecy, for which you, Lady Adelina, will not thank me.--It
will be fine, I am afraid, to-morrow.'

'And the day following we embark for France,' said Mrs. Stafford; 'how
providential that we could not sail yesterday!'

'Your heart fails you, my dear Mrs. Stafford,' replied Godolphin, 'and I
do not wonder at it. But I will tell you what you shall allow me to do:
I will attend you to-morrow to Southampton, where in the character of a
veteran seaman I will direct your departure, (as the whole pacquet is
yours) according to the appearance of the weather; and to indulge me
still farther, you shall suffer me to see you landed at Havre. Adelina,
I know, will be wretched 'till she hears you are safe on the other side;
and will therefore willingly spare me to bring her such intelligence;
and give me at the same time a fortunate opportunity of being useful to
you.'

Mrs. Stafford, secretly rejoiced at a proposal which would secure them a
protector and as much safety as depended on human skill, could not
conceal her wish to assent to it; tho' she expressed great reluctance to
give him so much trouble.

Godolphin then consulted the eyes of Emmeline, which on meeting his were
cast down; but he could not find that they expressed any displeasure at
his offer: he therefore assured Mrs. Stafford that he should consider it
as a pleasurable scheme with a party to whom he was indifferent; 'but
when,' added he, 'it gives me the means of being of the least use to
you, to Miss Mowbray, and your children, I shall find in it not only
pleasure but happiness. Alas! how poorly it will repay the twentieth
part of the obligation we owe you!'

It was settled therefore that Mr. Godolphin was to cross the channel
with them. Again Emmeline tried to be sorry, and again found herself
incapable of feeling any thing but satisfaction in hearing that he would
be yet longer with them.

During the rest of the evening, he tried to assume a degree of
chearfulness; and did in some measure feel it in the prospect of this
farther temporary indulgence.

Lady Adelina, unable to conceal her concern, drooped without any effort
to imitate him; and when they parted for the night, could not help
deploring in terms of piercing regret their approaching separation.

The assurances Godolphin had given them of a favourable morning were
fulfilled. They found that tho' there was yet a considerable swell, the
wind had subsided entirely, and that they might safely cross to
Southampton. The boat that was to convey them was ready; and Emmeline
could not take leave of Lady Adelina without sharing the anguish which
she could not mitigate. They embraced silently and in tears; and
Emmeline pressed to her heart the little boy, to whom she was tenderly
attached.

Godolphin was a silent spectator of this melancholy farewel. The
softness of Emmeline's heart was to him her greatest charm, and he could
hardly help repeating, in the words of Louis XIV--'She has so much
sensibility that it must be an exquisite pleasure to be beloved by her!'

He sighed in remembering that such could not be his happiness; then
wishing to shorten a scene which so violently affected the unsettled
spirits of Lady Adelina, he would have led Mrs. Stafford and Emmeline
away; but Lady Adelina insisted on following them to the shore; smiled
thro' her tears; and promised to behave better. Silently they walked to
the sea-side. Mrs. Stafford hastily embracing her, was handed into the
boat by Godolphin; who then advancing with forced gaiety to Emmeline,
about whom his sister still fondly hung, said--'Come, come, I must have
no more adieus--as if you were never to meet again.'

'Ah! who can tell,' answered Lady Adelina, 'that we ever shall!'

Emmeline spoke not; but kissing the hand of her weeping friend, gave her
own to Godolphin; while Lady Adelina, resting on the arm of her woman,
and overwhelmed with sorrow, suffered the boat to depart.

It rowed swiftly away; favoured by the tide. Lady Adelina remained on
the shore as long as she could distinguish it; and then slowly and
reluctantly returned to solitude and tears: while her two friends,
attended by her brother, landed safely at Southampton, where he busied
himself in settling every thing for their departure the next morning in
the pacquet which they had hired, and which now lay ready to receive
them.

During their passage to Havre, which was short and prosperous, the
attention of Godolphin was equally divided between Mrs. Stafford, her
children, and Emmeline. But when he assisted the latter to leave the
vessel, he could not forbear pressing her to his heart, while in a deep
sigh he bade adieu to the happiness of being with her; for he concluded
she would not long remain single, and after she was married he
determined never more to trust himself with the dangerous pleasure of
beholding her.

He had never mentioned the name of Delamere; and knew not that he was
returned to England. Having once been assured of her engagement, he was
unable to enquire into the circumstances of what had destroyed his
happiness. He knew they were to be married in March, and that Delamere
had promised to remain on the Continent 'till that period. He doubted
not, therefore, but that Emmeline, in compliance with the entreaties of
her lover, had consented to accompany Mrs. Stafford to France, and by
her presence to charm away the months that yet intervened; after which
he supposed they would be immediately united.

Notwithstanding some remarks he had made on the interest she seemed to
take in regard to himself, he imputed it merely to her general
sensibility and to his relationship to Lady Adelina. He supposed that
Delamere possessed her heart; and tho' it was the only possession on
earth that would give him any chance of happiness, he envied this happy
lover without hating him. He could not blame him for loving her, who was
in his own opinion irresistible; nor for having used the opportunity his
good fortune had given him of winning her affections. The longer he
conversed with her, the more he was convinced that Delamere, in being as
he believed master of that heart, was the most fortunate of human
beings. But tho' he had not resolution enough to refuse himself the
melancholy yet pleasing gratification of contemplating perfections which
he thought could never be his, and tho' he could not help sometimes
betraying the fondness which that indulgence hourly encreased, he never
seriously meditated supplanting the happy Delamere. He did not think
that to attempt it was honourable; and his integrity would have
prevented the trial, had he supposed it possible to succeed.

Mrs. Stafford had at first seen with concern that Godolphin, whom she
sincerely esteemed, was nourishing for her friend a passion which could
only serve to make him unhappy. But she now saw it's progress rather
with pleasure than regret. She was piqued at the groundless jealousy and
rash injustice of Delamere towards Emmeline: and disappointed and
disgusted at Lord Montreville's conduct towards herself; sickening at
the little sincerity of the latter, and doubtful of the temper of the
former, she feared that if the alliance took place, her friend would
find less happiness than splendour: and she looked with partial eyes on
Godolphin; who in morals, manners, and temper, was equally
unexceptionable, and whose fortune, tho' inferior to his birth, was yet
enough for happiness in that style of life which she knew better
calculated for the temper and taste of Emmeline than the parade and
grandeur she might share with Delamere.

Godolphin had no parents to accept her with disdainful and cold
acquiescence--no sister to treat her with supercilious condescension.--But
all his family, tho' of a rank superior to that of Delamere, would
receive her with transport, and treat her with the respect and affection
she deserved.

Mrs. Stafford, however, spoke not to Emmeline of this revolution in her
sentiments, but chose rather to let the affair take it's course than to
be in any degree answerable for it's consequences.

The hour in which Godolphin was to leave them now approached. Unable to
determine on bidding Emmeline farewel, he would still have lingered with
her, and would have gone on with them to Rouen, where Stafford waited
their arrival: but this, Mrs. Stafford was compelled to decline; fearing
least this extraordinary attention in a stranger should induce her
husband to make enquiry into their first acquaintance, and by that means
lead to discoveries which could not fail of being injurious to Lady
Adelina.

Of all that related to her, he was at present ignorant. He had been
told, that the infant which his wife and Miss Mowbray so often visited,
was the son of an acquaintance of the latter; who being obliged soon
after it's birth to go to the West Indies, had sent it to Bath to
Emmeline, who had undertaken to overlook the nurse to whose care it was
committed.

Into a circumstance which offered neither a scheme to occupy his mind,
or money to purchase his pleasures, Stafford thought it not then worth
his while farther to enquire; but now, in a country of which he
understood not the language, and detached from his usual pursuits, Mrs.
Stafford knew not what strange suspicions the assiduity of Godolphin
might excite in a head so oddly constructed; and without explaining her
reasons to Godolphin, she said enough to convince him that he must, with
whatever reluctance, leave the lovely travellers at Havre.

He busied himself, however, in adjusting every thing for the safety of
their journey; and being in the course of their preparations left alone
with Emmeline in a room of the hotel, he could not forbear using the
last opportunity he was likely to have of speaking to her.--

'Has Miss Mowbray any commands to Lady Adelina?'

'My most affectionate love!' answered Emmeline, 'my truest remembrance!
And tell her, that the moment I am settled I will give her an account of
my situation, and of all that happens worth her knowing.'

'We shall hear then,' said he, forcing a melancholy smile, 'we shall
hear when you meet the fortunate, the happy Mr. Delamere.'

'Lady Adelina,' blushingly replied Emmeline, 'will certainly know it if
I should meet him; but nothing is at present more improbable.'

'Tis now,' reassumed Godolphin, 'the last week of
January--February--March--ah! how soon March will come! Tell me, how
long in that month may Adelina direct to Miss Mowbray?'

'Mr. Delamere, Sir,' said Emmeline, gravely, 'is not now in France.'

'But may he not immediately return thither from Geneva or any other
place? Is my sister, Lady Westhaven, to be present at the ceremony?'

'The ceremony,' answered she, half angry and half vexed, 'may perhaps
never take place.'

The awkwardness of her situation in regard to Delamere arose forcibly to
her mind, and something lay very heavy at her heart. She tried to check
the tears which were filling her eyes, least they should be imputed to a
very different cause; but the effort she made to conquer her feelings
rendered them more acute. She took out a handkerchief to wipe away these
involuntary betrayers of her emotion, and sitting down, audibly sobbed.

Godolphin had asked these questions, in that sort of desperate
resolution which a person exerts who determines to know, in the hope of
being able to endure, the worst that can befal him. But he was now
shocked at the distress they had occasioned, and unable to bear the
sight of her tears.

'Pardon me,' cried he, 'pardon me, most lovely, most amiable
Emmeline!--oh! pardon me for having given a moment's pain to that soft
and sensible bosom. Had I suspected that a reference to an event towards
which I supposed you looked forward with pleasure, could thus affect
you, I had not presumed to name it. Whenever it happens,' added he,
after a short pause--'whenever it happens, Delamere will be the most
enviable of human beings: and may you, Madam, be as happy as you are
truly deserving of happiness!'

He dared not trust his voice with another word: but under pretence of
fetching a glass of water left the room, and having recovered himself,
quickly returned and offered it to Emmeline, again apologizing for
having offended her.

She took the glass from him; and faintly smiling thro' her tears, said
in the gentlest accents--'I am not offended--I am only low spirited.
Tired by the voyage, and shrinking from the fatigue of a long journey,
yet you talk to me of a journey for life, on which I may never set out
in the company you mention--and still more probably never undertake at
all.'

The entrance of Mrs. Stafford, who came to entreat some directions from
Godolphin, prevented the continuance of this critical conversation; in
which, whatever the words imported in regard to Delamere, he found but
little hope for himself. He attributed what Emmeline had said to mere
evasion, and her concern to some little accidental neglect on the part
of her lover which had excited her displeasure. Ignorant of the jealousy
Delamere had conceived from the misrepresentation of the Crofts', which
the solicitude of Emmeline for the infant of Lady Adelina had so
immediately matured, he had not the most distant idea of the truth; nor
suspected that the passion of Delamere for Emmeline, which he knew had
within a few weeks been acknowledged without hesitation, and received
with encouragement, was now become to him a source of insupportable
torment; that she had left England without bidding him adieu, or even
informing him that she was gone.

The two chaises were now ready; and Godolphin having placed in the
first, Mrs. Stafford and her younger children, approached Emmeline to
lead her to the second, in which she was to accompany the elder. He
stopped a moment as they were quitting the room, and said--'I cannot,
Miss Mowbray, bid you adieu till you say you forgive me for the
impertinence of my questions.'

'For impertinence?' answered Emmeline, giving him her hand--'I cannot
forgive you, because I know not that you have been guilty of it. Before
I go, however, allow me to thank you most sincerely for the protection
you have afforded us.'

'And not one word,' cried he, 'not one parting good wish to your little
_protege_--to my poor William?'

'Ah! I send him a thousand!' answered Emmeline.

'And one last kiss, which I will carry him.' She suffered him to salute
her; and then he hastily led her to the chaise; and, as he put her in,
said very solemnly--'Let me repeat my wishes, Madam, that wheresoever
you are, you may enjoy felicity--felicity which I shall never again
know; and that Mr. Delamere--the fortunate Delamere--may be as sensible
of your value as----'

Emmeline, to avoid hearing this sentence concluded, bade the chaise
proceed. It instantly did so with all the velocity a French postillion
could give it; and hardly allowed her to observe the mournful
countenance and desponding air with which Godolphin bowed to her, as
she, waving her hand, again bade him adieu!

The travellers arrived in due time safe at Rouen; where Mrs. Stafford
found that her husband had been prevented meeting her, by the necessity
he fancied himself under to watch the early nests of his Canary birds,
of which he had now made a large collection, and whose encrease he
attended to with greater solicitude than the arrival of his family. Mrs.
Stafford saw with an eye of hopeless regret a new source of expence and
absurdity opened; but knowing that complaints were more likely to
produce anger and resentment in his mind, than any alteration in his
conduct, she was obliged to conceal her chagrin, and to take possession
of the gloomy chateau which her husband had chosen for her residence,
about six miles from Rouen; while Emmeline, with her usual equality of
temper, tried to reconcile herself to her new abode, and to share and
relieve the fatigue and uneasiness of her friend. She found the activity
she was for this purpose compelled to exert, assuaged and diverted that
pain which she now could no longer hope to conquer, tho' she had not yet
had the courage to ascertain, by a narrow examination of her heart in
regard to Godolphin, that it would be removed no more.

On the evening after he had bade her adieu, Godolphin embarked in the
pacquet which was on it's departure to England. The weather, tho' cold,
was calm; and he sat down on the deck, where, after they had got a few
leagues from France, all was profoundly quiet. Only the man at the helm
and one sailor were awake on board. The vessel glided thro' the expanse
of water; while the soul of Godolphin fled back to Emmeline, and dwelt
with lingering fondness on the object of all it's affection.



