

Emmeline having thus quitted England, and Delamere appearing no longer
to think of her, the Crofts', who had brought about an event so
desirable for Lord Montreville, thought it time to claim the reward of
such eminent service.

Miss Delamere, in meeting Lady Westhaven at Paris, had severely felt all
the difference of their situation; and as she had repented of her
clandestine union almost as soon as she had formed it, the comparison
between her sister's husband and her own had embittered her temper,
never very good, and made her return to England with reluctance; where
she knew that she could not long evade acknowledging her marriage, and
taking the inferior and humiliating name of _Mrs. Crofts_.

To avoid returning was however not in her power; nor could she prevail
on Crofts to delay a declaration which must be attended with
circumstances, to her most mortifying and unpleasant. But impatient to
demand a daughter of Lord Montreville as his wife, and still more
impatient to receive twelve thousand pounds, which was her's independant
of her father, he would hear of no delay; and the present opportunity of
conciliating Lord and Lady Montreville, was in the opinion of all the
Crofts' family not to be neglected.

Sir Richard undertook to disclose the affair to Lord Montreville, and to
parry the first effusions of his Lordship's anger by a very common, yet
generally successful stratagem, that of affecting to be angry first, and
drowning by his own clamours the complaints of the party really injured.

For this purpose, he waited early one morning on Lord Montreville, and
with a countenance where scornful superiority was dismissed for
pusillanimous dejection, he began.--

'My Lord--when I reflect and consider and remember the innumerable,
invaluable and extraordinary favours, kindnesses and obligations I owe
your Lordship, my heart bleeds--and I lament and deplore and regret that
it is my lot to announce and declare and discover, what will I fear give
infinite concern and distress and uneasiness to you--and my Lord----'

'What is all this, Sir Richard?' cried Lord Montreville, hastily
interrupting him.--'Is Delamere married?'

'Heaven forbid!' answered the hypocritical Crofts.--'Bad, and unwelcome,
and painful as what I have to say is, it does not amount or arise to
that misfortune and calamity.'

'Whatever it is Sir,' said his Lordship impatiently, 'let me hear it at
once.--Is it a dismission from my office?'

'Never, I hope!' replied Sir Richard. 'At least, for many years to come,
may this country not know and feel and be sensible of such a loss,
deprivation and defection. My Lord, my present concern is of a very
different nature; and I do assure and protest to your Lordship that no
time nor intreaties nor persuasion will erase and obliterate and wipe
away from my mind, the injury and prejudice the parties have done _me_,
by thus----'

'Keep me no longer in suspense!' almost angrily cried Lord Montreville.

'Mr. Crofts, my Lord; Mr. Crofts is, I find, married--'

'To _my_ daughter, Sir Richard.--Is it not so?'

'He is indeed, my Lord! and from this moment I disclaim, and renounce
and protest against him; for my Lord----'

Sir Richard continued his harangue, to which Lord Montreville did not
seem to attend. He was a moment silent, and then said--

'I have been more to blame than the parties.--I might have foreseen
this. But I thought Fanny's pride a sufficient defence against an
inferior alliance. Pray Sir, does Lady Montreville know of this
marriage?'

Sir Richard then related all that his son had told him; interlarding his
account with every circumstance that might induce his Lordship to
believe he was himself entirely ignorant of the intrigue. Lord
Montreville, however, knew too much of mankind in general, and of the
Crofts' in particular, to give implicit credit to this artful recital.
But Sir Richard was now become so necessary to him, and they had so many
secrets in common of great consequence to the political reputation of
both, that he could not determine to break with him. He considered too
that resentment could not unmarry his daughter; that the lineal honours
of his family could not be affected by her marriage; and that he owed
the Crofts' some favour for having counteracted the indiscretion of
Delamere. Determining therefore, after a short struggle, to sacrifice
his pride to his politics, he dismissed Sir Richard with infinitely less
appearance of resentment than he expected; and after long contention
with the furious and irascible pride of his wife, prevailed upon her to
let her daughter depart without her malediction. She would not see
Crofts, or pardon her daughter; protesting that she never could be
reconciled to a child of her's who bore such an appellation as that of
'_Mrs. Crofts_.' Soon afterwards, however, the Marquisate which Lord
Montreville had been so long promised was to be granted him. But his
wife could not bear, that by assuming a title which had belonged to the
Mowbray family, (a point he particularly wished to obtain) he should
drop or render secondary those honours which he derived from _her_
ancestors. Wearied by her persecution, and accustomed to yield to her
importunity, he at length gratified her, by relinquishing the name he
wished to bear, and taking the title of Marquis of Montreville, while
his son assumed that of Viscount Delamere. This circumstance seemed
more than any other to reconcile Lady Montreville to her eldest
daughter, whose surname she could evade under the more satisfactory
appellation of Lady Frances. She was now therefore admitted to her
mother's presence; Crofts received an haughty and reluctant pardon; and
some degree of tranquillity was restored to the noble house of
Mowbray-Delamere; while the Crofts', more elated and consequential than
before, behaved as if they had inherited and deserved the fortune and
splendor that surrounded them: and the table, the buildings, the
furniture of Sir Richard, vied in expence and magnificence with those of
the most affluent of the nobility.

Lord Delamere, to whom the acquisition of a title could offer nothing in
mitigation of the anguish inflicted by disappointed love, was now at
Dublin; where, immediately on his arrival, he had enquired for Colonel
Fitz-Edward at the house of his brother, Lord Clancarryl.

As the family were in the country, and only a servant in it, he could
not for some days obtain the information he wanted. He heard, however,
that Lord Clancarryl was very soon expected, and for his arrival he
determined to wait. In this interval of suspense, he heard from a
correspondent in England, that Miss Mowbray had not only disappeared
from Woodfield, but had actually quitted England; and was gone no one
knew precisely whither; but it was generally supposed to France.

Tho' he had sworn in bitterness of heart to drive for ever from it this
perfidious and fatal beauty, it seemed as if forgetting his resolution,
he had in this intelligence received a new injury. He still fancied that
she should have told him of her design to quit England, without
recollecting that he had given her no opportunity to speak to him at
all.

Again he felt his anger towards Fitz-Edward animated almost to madness;
and again impatiently sought to hasten a meeting when he might discuss
with him all the mischief he had sustained.

Lord Clancarryl coming for a few days to Dublin, found there letters
from Lord Montreville, in which his Lordship bespoke for his son the
acquaintance of the Clancarryl family. Desirous of shewing every
attention to a young man so nearly connected with his wife's family, by
the marriage of her brother, Lord Westhaven, to his youngest sister, and
related also to himself, Lord Clancarryl immediately sought Delamere;
and was surprised to find, that instead of receiving his advances with
warmth or even with politeness, he hardly returned them with common
civility, and seemed to attend to nothing that was said. The first pause
in the conversation, however, Delamere took advantage of to enquire
after Colonel Fitz-Edward.

'My brother,' answered Lord Clancarryl, 'left us only three days ago.'

'For London, my Lord?'

'No; he is gone with two other friends on a kind of pleasurable
tour.--They hired a sloop at Cork to take them to France.'

'To France!' exclaimed Delamere--'Mr. Fitz-Edward gone to France?'

'Yes,' replied Lord Clancarryl, somewhat wondering at the surprise
Delamere expressed--'and I promoted the plan as much as I could; for
poor George is, I am afraid, in a bad state of health; his looks and his
spirits are not what they used to be. Chearful company, and this little
tour, may I hope restore them. But how happens it that he knew not, Sir,
of your return? He was persuaded you were still abroad; and expressed
some pleasure at the thoughts of meeting you when you least expected
it.'

'No, no, my Lord,' cried Delamere, in a voice rendered almost
inarticulate by contending passions--'his hope was not to meet _me_. He
is gone with far other designs.'

'What designs, Lord Delamere?' gravely asked Lord Clancarryl.

'My Lord,' answered Delamere, recollecting himself, 'I mean not to
trouble you on this matter. I have some business to adjust with Mr.
Fitz-Edward; and since he is not here, have only to request of your
Lordship information when he returns, or whither a letter may follow
him?'

'Sir,' returned Lord Clancarryl with great gravity, 'I believe I can
answer for Colonel Fitz-Edward's readiness to settle _any business_ you
may desire to adjust with him; and I wish, since there is _business_
between ye, that I could name the time when you are likely to meet him.
All, however, I can decidedly say is, that he intends going to Paris,
but that his stay in France will not exceed five or six weeks in the
whole; and that such letters as I may have occasion to send, are to be
addressed to the care of Monsieur de Guisnon, banker, at Paris.'

Delamere having received this intelligence, took a cold leave; and Lord
Clancarryl, who had before heard much of his impetuous temper and
defective education, was piqued at his distant manner, and returned to
his house in the country without making any farther effort to cultivate
his friendship.

Debating whether he should follow Fitz-Edward to France or wait his
return to Ireland, Delamere remained, torn with jealousy and distracted
by delay. He was convinced beyond a doubt, that Fitz-Edward had met
Emmeline in France by her own appointment. 'But let them not,' cried
he--'let them not hope to escape me! Let them not suppose I will
relinquish my purpose 'till I have punished their infamy or cease to
feel it!--Oh, Emmeline! Emmeline! is it for this I pursued--for this I
won thee!'

The violence of those emotions he felt after Lord Clancarryl's
departure, subsided only because he had no one to listen to, no one to
answer him. He determined, as Lord Clancarryl seemed so certain of his
brother's return in the course of six weeks, to wait in Ireland 'till
the end of that period, since there was but little probability of his
meeting him if he pursued him to France. He concluded that wherever
Emmeline was, Fitz-Edward might be found also; but the residence of
Emmeline he knew not, nor could he bear a moment to think that he might
see them together.

The violence of his resentment, far from declining, seemed to resist all
the checks it's gratification received, and to burn with accumulated
fury. His nights brought only tormenting dreams; his days only a
repetition of unavailing anguish.

He had several acquaintances among young men of fashion at Dublin. With
them he sometimes associated; and tried to forget his uneasiness in the
pleasures of the table; and sometimes he shunned them entirely, and shut
himself up to indulge his disquiet.

In the mean time, Lady Clancarryl was extremely mortified at the account
her husband gave her of Delamere's behaviour. She knew that her brother,
Lord Westhaven, would be highly gratified by any attention shewn to the
family of his wife; particularly to a brother to whom Lady Westhaven was
so much attached. She therefore entreated her Lord to overlook
Delamere's petulance, and renew the invitation he had given him to Lough
Carryl. But his Lordship, disgusted with the reception he had before met
with, laughed, and desired her to try whether _her_ civilities would be
more graciously accepted. Lady Clancarryl therefore took the trouble to
go herself to Dublin: where she so pressingly insisted on Delamere's
passing a fortnight with them, that he could not evade the invitation
without declaring his animosity against Fitz-Edward, and his resolution
to demand satisfaction--a declaration which could not fail of rendering
his purpose abortive. He returned, therefore, to Lough Carryl with her
Ladyship; meaning to stay only a few days, and feeling hurt at being
thus compelled to become the inmate of a family into which he might so
soon carry grief and resentment.

Godolphin, after his return to the Isle of Wight, abandoned himself more
than ever to the indulgence of his passion. He soothed yet encreased his
melancholy by poetry and music; and Lady Adelina for some time
contributed to nourish feelings too much in unison with her own. He now
no longer affected to conceal from her his attachment to her lovely
friend; but to her only it was known. Her voice, and exquisite taste, he
loved to employ in singing the verses he made; and he would sit hours by
her _piano forte_ to hear repeated one of the many sonnets he had
written on her who occupied all his thoughts.


                     SONNET

    When welcome slumber sets my spirit free
      Forth to fictitious happiness it flies,
    And where Elysian bowers of bliss arise
      I seem, my Emmeline--to meet with thee!

    Ah! Fancy then, dissolving human ties,
      Gives me the wishes of my soul to see;
    Tears of fond pity fill thy softened eyes;
      In heavenly harmony--our hearts agree.

    Alas! these joys are mine in dreams alone,
    When cruel Reason abdicates her throne!
      Her harsh return condemns me to complain
    Thro' life unpitied, unrelieved, unknown.
      And, as the dear delusions leave my brain,
      She bids the truth recur--with aggravated pain.


But Lady Adelina herself at length grew uneasy at beholding the progress
of this unhappy passion. His mind seemed to have lost all it's strength,
and to be incapable of making even an effort to shake off an affection
which his honour would not allow him to attempt rendering successful.
His spirits, affected by the listless solitude in which he lived, were
sunk into hopeless despondence; and his sister was every day more
alarmed, not only for his peace but for his life. She therefore tried
to make him determine to quit her, for a short abode in London; but to
do that he absolutely refused. Lord Clancarryl had long pressed him to
go to Ireland: he had not seen his eldest sister for some years; and
ardently wished to embrace her and her children. But Fitz-Edward was at
her house; and to meet Fitz-Edward was impossible. Lady Clancarryl,
deceived by a plausible story, which had been framed to account for Lady
Adelina's absence, was, as well as her Lord, entirely ignorant of the
share Fitz-Edward had in it: they believed it to have been occasioned
solely by her antipathy to Trelawny, and her fear lest her relations
should insist on her again residing with him; and it was necessary that
nothing should be said to undeceive them.

Godolphin had therefore been obliged to form several excuses to account
for his declining the pressing invitations he received; and he found
that his eldest sister was already much hurt by his apparent neglect. In
one of her last letters, she had mentioned that Fitz-Edward was gone to
France; and Lady Adelina pointed out to Godolphin several passages which
convinced him he had given pain by his long absence to his beloved
Camilla, and prevailed upon him to go to Ireland. He arrived therefore
at Lough Carryl two days after his sister had returned thither with Lord
Delamere.



