

To fix some plan for her future life, Emmeline now thought absolutely
and immediately necessary. To go to Mowbray Castle seemed the properest
measure she could adopt; and on that she appeared to determine. But tho'
she still meant to adhere to her resolution of remaining single until
she became of age, the tender importunity of her lover, the pressing
entreaties of her friends, and her own wishes to make them happy, were
every hour more powerfully undermining it. Her mind, softened by grief
for the death of poor Delamere, and more fondly attached than ever to
the generous Godolphin; whose noble qualities that unhappy event had
served to call forth anew, was rendered less capable than ever of
resisting his prayers; and Delamere, on whose account her determination
had been originally made, could now no longer suffer by her breaking it.
Still, however, she insisted upon it, that a term little short of what
she had named should elapse before her marriage should take place; as a
compliment to the memory of her unfortunate lover, and to the deep
sorrow of her uncle and Lady Westhaven.

Here, then, she rested her last defence. And when their encreasing
solicitations obliged her to consent to shorten the term to three
months, Godolphin undertook to make it the particular request of Lord
Montreville and his daughter, that their marriage should take place
within three weeks. Animated by the hopes of hastening the period, he
went himself into Kent; where he pleaded so successfully to Lady
Westhaven, that she not only wrote pressingly to Emmeline, but prevailed
on the Marquis to give him a letter also; in which, after deploring, in
terms expressive of anguish and regret, that unfortunate infatuation
which had eventually robbed him of his son, he told her that he had
very little more now to wish, dead as he was to the world, than to see
her happily married. That the tender attention of the generous Godolphin
to that beloved son, in the last hours of his life, had endeared him to
him above all other men; that his character, connections and conduct
were unexceptionable; and therefore, his Lordship added, that tho' he
did not know that he could himself bear to see it, he wished she would
not hesitate to complete his happiness; observing, that if she thought
it too early after the loss of so near a relation, she might have the
ceremony performed with such privacy, that only the respective families
need know of its celebration. Emmeline, having now no longer a
subterfuge, was obliged to let Godolphin take his own way. He exerted
himself so anxiously to get the deeds completed, that before the end of
three weeks they were finished. Lord and Lady Clancarryl prolonged their
stay on purpose; and they, together with Lady Adelina and Fitz-Edward,
were present at the ceremony. When it was over, Lord and Lady Clancarryl
took an affectionate leave of the bride and bridegroom, and set out for
Ireland, accompanied by Fitz-Edward; who, with the most painful
reluctance tearing himself from Lady Adelina by her express desire, was
yet allowed to carry with him the hope, that at the end of her mourning
she would relent, and accede to the entreaties of all her family.

Godolphin, his Emmeline, his sister and her little boy, took immediately
afterwards the road to East Cliff. They continued there the months of
May and June; where, about six weeks after their marriage, they were
visited by Lord and Lady Westhaven; the latter having never left her
father 'till then, and being impatient to return to him, tho' she
assured Mrs. Godolphin that he was much calmer and more composed than
they had at first expected. In the filial attention of his youngest
daughter he found all the consolation his misfortunes would admit of on
this side the grave; and Emmeline, who had deeply lamented the lingering
and hopeless anguish to which her uncle was condemned, heard with
satisfaction that resignation was, however slowly, blunting the anguish
he had endured; and that having relinquished for ever all those
ambitious pursuits to which he had sacrificed solid happiness, he
thought only of rewarding the piety and tenderness of his youngest
daughter; and heard of the happiness of his niece with pleasure. When
Lord and Lady Westhaven left East Cliff, Mr. and Mrs. Godolphin and
Lady Adelina went to Mowbray Castle; where Mrs. Stafford received them
with transport, and where they were surrounded by numberless tenants and
dependants, who blessed the hour of it's restoration to it's benevolent
and lovely mistress, as well as that which had given her to a man, who
had a heart as nobly enlarged, and a spirit generously liberal, as her
own.

The comfortable establishment of Mrs. Stafford at Woodfield, was a point
which Emmeline had much at heart; and Godolphin, who knew it was now
almost her first wish, took his measures with so much success, that it
was soon accomplished. Mrs. Stafford, however, at their united request,
consented to stay with them while they remained at Mowbray Castle; and
Emmeline had the delightful assurances of having made her happy, as well
as of having greatly contributed to the restored tranquillity of Lady
Adelina.

Mowbray Castle, ever so peculiarly dear to Mrs. Godolphin, and where she
was now blessed with her beloved husband and her charming friends,
brought however to her mind the mournful remembrance of poor Delamere;
and the tears of rapture with which the greatness of her own happiness
sometimes filled her eyes, were mingled with those of sorrow for his
untimely death. She considered him as the victim of his mother's fatal
fondness and his father's ambition: yet that his early death was not
immediately owing to his violent passion for her, was a great
consolation; and with only the one source of regret which his premature
fate occasioned, and which being without remedy yielded inevitably to
time; she saw an infinite deal for which to be grateful, and failed not
to offer her humble acknowledgments to that Providence, who, from
dependance and indigence, had raised her to the highest affluence; given
her, in the tenderest of husbands, the best, the most generous and most
amiable of men; and had bestowed on her the means and the inclination to
deserve, by virtue and beneficence, that heaven, where only she can
enjoy more perfect and lasting felicity.


    FINIS


