
  Can Music's voice, can Beauty's eye,
  Can Painting's glowing hand supply
  A charm so suited to my mind,
  As blows this hollow gust of wind?
  As drops this little weeping rill,
  Soft tinkling down the moss-grown hill;
 While, through the west, where sinks the crimson day,
 Meek Twilight slowly sails, and waves her banners gray?
     MASON
Emily, some time after her return to La Vallee, received letters from her aunt, 
Madame Cheron, in which, after some common-place condolement and advice, she 
invited her to Tholouse, and added, that, as her late brother had entrusted 
Emily's EDUCATION to her, she should consider herself bound to overlook her 
conduct. Emily, at this time, wished only to remain at La Vallee, in the scenes 
of her early happiness, now rendered infinitely dear to her, as the late 
residence of those, whom she had lost for ever, where she could weep 
unobserved, retrace their steps, and remember each minute particular of their 
manners. But she was equally anxious to avoid the displeasure of Madame Cheron.
Though her affection would not suffer her to question, even a moment, the 
propriety of St. Aubert's conduct in appointing Madame Cheron for her guardian, 
she was sensible, that this step had made her happiness depend, in a great 
degree, on the humour of her aunt. In her reply, she begged permission to 
remain, at present, at La Vallee, mentioning the extreme dejection of her 
spirits, and the necessity she felt for quiet and retirement to restore them. 
These she knew were not to be found at Madame Cheron's, whose inclinations led 
her into a life of dissipation, which her ample fortune encouraged; and, having 
given her answer, she felt somewhat more at ease.
In the first days of her affliction, she was visited by Monsieur Barreaux, a 
sincere mourner for St. Aubert. 'I may well lament my friend,' said he, 'for I 
shall never meet with his resemblance. If I could have found such a man in what 
is called society, I should not have left it.'