
 Lull'd in the countless chambers of the brain,
 Our thoughts are link'd by many a hidden chain:
 Awake but one, and lo! what myriads rise!
 Each stamps its image as the other flies!
     PLEASURES OF MEMORY
Emily pursued her journey, without any accident, along the plains of Languedoc 
towards the north-west; and, on this her return to Tholouse, which she had last 
left with Madame Montoni, she thought much on the melancholy fate of her aunt, 
who, but for her own imprudence, might now have been living in happiness there! 
Montoni, too, often rose to her fancy, such as she had seen him in his days of 
triumph, bold, spirited and commanding; such also as she had since beheld him 
in his days of vengeance; and now, only a few short months had passed—and he 
had no longer the power, or the will to afflict;—he had become a clod of 
earth, and his life was vanished like a shadow! Emily could have wept at his 
fate, had she not remembered his crimes; for that of her unfortunate aunt she 
did weep, and all sense of her errors was overcome by the recollection of her 
misfortunes.
Other thoughts and other emotions succeeded, as Emily drew near the well-known 
scenes of her early love, and considered, that Valancourt was lost to her and 
to himself, for ever. At length, she came to the brow of the hill, whence, on 
her departure for Italy, she had given a farewell look to this beloved 
landscape, amongst whose woods and fields she had so often walked with 
Valancourt, and where he was then to inhabit, when she would be far, far away! 
She saw, once more, that chain of the Pyrenees, which overlooked La Vallee, 
rising, like faint clouds, on the horizon. 'There, too, is Gascony, extended at 
their feet!' said she, 'O my father,—my mother! And there, too, is the 
Garonne!' she added, drying the tears, that obscured her sight,—'and 
Tholouse, and my aunt's mansion—and the groves in her garden!—O my friends! 
are ye all lost to me—must I never, never see ye more!' Tears rushed again to 
her eyes, and she continued to weep, till an abrupt turn in the road had nearly 
occasioned the carriage to overset, when, looking up, she perceived another 
part of the well-known scene around Tholouse, and all the reflections and 
anticipations, which she had suffered, at the moment, when she bade it last 
adieu, came with recollected force to her heart. She remembered how anxiously 
she had looked forward to the futurity, which was to decide her happiness 
concerning Valancourt, and what depressing fears had assailed her; the very 
words she had uttered, as she withdrew her last look from the prospect, came to 
her memory. 'Could I but be certain,' she had then said, 'that I should ever 
return, and that Valancourt would still live for me—I should go in peace!'
Now, that futurity, so anxiously anticipated, was arrived, she was 
returned—but what a dreary blank appeared!—Valancourt no longer lived for 
her! She had no longer even the melancholy satisfaction of contemplating his 
image in her heart, for he was no longer the same Valancourt she had cherished 
there—the solace of many a mournful hour, the animating friend, that had 
enabled her to bear up against the oppression of Montoni—the distant hope, 
that had beamed over her gloomy prospect! On perceiving this beloved idea to be 
an illusion of her own creation, Valancourt seemed to be annihilated, and her 
soul sickened at the blank, that remained. His marriage with a rival, even his 
death, she thought she could have endured with more fortitude, than this 
discovery; for then, amidst all her grief, she could have looked in secret upon 
the image of goodness, which her fancy had drawn of him, and comfort would have 
mingled with her suffering!
Drying her tears, she looked, once more, upon the landscape, which had excited 
them, and perceived, that she was passing the very bank, where she had taken 
leave of Valancourt, on the morning of her departure from Tholouse, and she now 
saw him, through her returning tears, such as he had appeared, when she looked 
from the carriage to give him a last adieu—saw him leaning mournfully against 
the high trees, and remembered the fixed look of mingled tenderness and 
anguish, with which he had then regarded her. This recollection was too much 
for her heart, and she sunk back in the carriage, nor once looked up, till it 
stopped at the gates of what was now her own mansion.
These being opened, and by the servant, to whose care the chateau had been 
entrusted, the carriage drove into the court, where, alighting, she hastily 
passed through the great hall, now silent and solitary, to a large oak parlour, 
the common sitting room of the late Madame Montoni, where, instead of being 
received by M. Quesnel, she found a letter from him, informing her that 
business of consequence had obliged him to leave Tholouse two days before. 
Emily was, upon the whole, not sorry to be spared his presence, since his 
abrupt departure appeared to indicate the same indifference, with which he had 
formerly regarded her. This letter informed her, also, of the progress he had 
made in the settlement of her affairs, and concluded with directions, 
concerning the forms of some business, which remained for her to transact. But 