Consequence of the preceding Visit. p. 227
BOOK XVII. Containing three Days.
CHAP. I. Containing a Portion of Introductory Writing. p. 232 CHAP. II. The
generous and grateful Behavior of Mrs. Miller. p. 234 CHAP. III. The Arrival
of Mr. Western, with some Matters concerning the Paternal Authority. p. 238
CHAP. IV. An extraordinary Scene between Sophia and her Aunt. p. 247 CHAP. V.
Mrs. Miller and Mr. Nightingale visit Jones in the Prison. p. 252 CHAP. VI. In
which Mrs. Miller pays a Visit to Sophia. p. 257 CHAP. VII. A pathetick Scene
between Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Miller. p. 261 CHAP. VIII. Containing various
Matters. p. 265 CHAP. IX. What happened to Mr. Jones in the Prison. p. 272
BOOK XVIII. Containing about Six Days.
CHAP. I. A Farewell to the Reader. p. 280 CHAP. II. Containing a very tragical
Incident. p. 282 CHAP. III. Allworthy visits old Nightingale; with a strange
Discovery that he made on that Occasion. p. 288 CHAP. IV. Containing two
Letters in very different Styles. p. 294 CHAP. V. In which the History is
continued. p. 298 CHAP. VI. In which the History is farther continued. p. 305
CHAP. VII. Continuation of the History. p. 310 CHAP. VIII. Further
Continuation. p. 316 CHAP. IX. A further Continuation. p. 326 CHAP. X. Wherein
the History begins to draw toward a Conclusion. p. 335 CHAP. XI. The History
draws nearer to a Conclusion. p. 342 CHAP. XII. Approaching still nearer to the
End. p. 350 CHAP. The last. In which the History is concluded. p. 358
THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK XIII. Containing the Space of Twelve Days.
CHAP. I. An Invocation.
COME, bright Love of Fame, inspire my glowing Breast: Not thee I call, who
over swelling Tides of Blood and Tears, do bear the Hero on to Glory, while
Sighs of Millions waft his spreading Sails; but thee, fair, gentle Maid, whom
Mnesis, happy Nymph, first on the Banks of Hebrus did produce. Thee, whom
Maeonia educated, whom Mantua charmed, and who, on that fair Hill which
overlooks the proud Metropolis of Britain, sat, with thy Milton, sweetly tuning
the Heroic Lyre; fill my ravished Fancy with the Hopes of charming Ages yet to
come. Foretell me that some tender Maid, whose Grandmother is yet unborn,
hereafter, when under the fictitious Name of Sophia, she reads the real worth
which once existed in my Charlotte, shall, from her sympathetic Breast, send
forth the heaving Sigh. Do thou teach me not only to foresee, but to enjoy,
nay, even to feed on future Praise. Comfort me by a solemn Assurance, that when
the little Parlour in which I sit at this Instant, shall be reduced to a worse
furnished Box, I shall be read, with Honor, by those who never knew nor saw
me, and whom I shall neither know nor see.

And thou, much plumper Dame, whom no airy Forms nor Phantoms of Imagination
cloathe: Whom the well-seasoned Beef, and Pudding richly stained with Plumbs
delight. Thee, I call; of whom in a Trachtchugt in some Dutch Canal the fat
Ufrow Gelt, impregnated by a jolly Merchant of Amsterdam, was delivered: In
Grubstreet-School did thou suck in the Elements of thy Erudition. Here have
thou, in thy maturer Age, taught Poetry to tickle not the Fancy, but the Pride
of the Patron. Comedy from thee learns a grave and solemn Air; while Tragedy
storms loud, and rends the affrighted Theaters with its Thunder. To sooth thy
wearied Limbs in Slumber, Alderman History tells his tedious Tale; and again to
awaken thee, Monsieur Romance performs his surprising Tricks of Dexterity. Nor
less thy well-fed Bookseller obeys thy Influence. By thy Advice the heavy,
unread, Folio Lump, which long had dozed on the dusty Shelf, piece-mealed into
Numbers, runs nimbly through the Nation. Instructed by thee some Books, like
Quacks, impose on the World by promising Wonders; while others turn Beaus, and
trust all their Merits to a gilded Outside. Come, thou jolly Substance, with
thy shining Face, keep back thy Inspiration, but hold forth thy tempting
Rewards; thy shining, chinking Heap; thy quickly-convertible Bank-bill, big
with unseen Riches; thy often-varying Stock; the warm, the comfortable House;
and, lastly, a fair Portion of that bounteous Mother, whose flowing Breasts
yield redundant Sustenance for all her numerous Offspring, did not some too
greedily and wantonly drive their Brethren from the Teat. Come thou, and if I
am too tasteless of thy valuable Treasures, warm my Heart with the transporting
Thought of conveying them to others. Tell me, that through thy Bounty, the
prattling Babes, whose innocent Play has often been interrupted by my Labors,
may one Time be amply rewarded for them.

And now this ill-yoked Pair, this lean Shadow and this fat Substance, have
prompted me to write, whose Assistance shall I invoke to direct my Pen?

First, Genius; thou Gift of Heaven; without whose Aid, in vain we struggle
against the Stream of Nature. Thou, who do sow the generous Seeds which Art
nourishes, and brings to Perfection. Do thou kindly take me by the Hand, and
lead me through all the Mazes, the winding Labyrinths of Nature. Initiate me
into all those Mysteries which profane Eyes never beheld. Teach me, which to
thee is no difficult Task, to know Mankind better than they know themselves.
Remove that Mist which dims the Intellects of Mortals, and causes them to adore
Men for their Art, or to detest them for their Cunning in deceiving others,
when they are, in reality, the Objects only of Ridicule, for deceiving
themselves. Strip off the thin Disguise of Wisdom from Self-Conceit, of Plenty
from Avarice, and of Glory from Ambition. Come thou, that have inspired thy
Aristophanes, thy Lucian, thy Cervantes, thy Rabelais, thy Moliere, thy
Shakespeare, thy Swift, thy Marivaux, fill my Pages with Humor; 'till Mankind
learn the Goodnature to laugh only at the Follies of others, and the Humility
to grieve at their own.

And thou, almost the constant Attendant on true Genius, Humanity, bring all
thy tender Sensations. If thou have already disposed of them all between thy
Allen and thy Lyttleton, steal them a little while from their Bosoms. Not
without these the tender Scene is painted. From these alone proceed the noble,
disinterested Friendship, the melting Love, the generous Sentiment, the ardent
Gratitude, the soft Compassion, the candid Opinion; and all those strong
Energies of a good Mind, which fill the moistened Eyes with Tears, the glowing
Cheeks with Blood, and swell the Heart with Tides of Grief, Joy, and
Benevolence.

And thou, O Learning, (for without thy Assistance, nothing pure, nothing
correct, can Genius produce) do thou guide my Pen. Thee, in thy favorite
Fields, where the limpid, gently rolling Thames washes thy Etonian Banks, in
early Youth I have worshipped. To thee, at thy birchen Altar, with true Spartan
Devotion, I have sacrificed my Blood. Come, then, and from thy vast luxuriant
Stores, in long Antiquity piled up, pour forth the rich Profusion. Open thy
Maeonian and thy Mantuan Coffers, with whatever else includes thy Philosophic,
thy Poetic, and thy Historical Treasures, whether with Greek or Roman
Characters thou have chosen to inscribe the ponderous Chests: Give me a while
that Key, to all thy Treasures, which to thy Warburton thou have entrusted.

Lastly, come Experience long conversant with the Wise, the Good, the Learned,
and the Polite. Nor with them only, but with every Kind of Character from the
Minister at his Levee, to the Bailiff in his Spunging-House; from the Duchess
at her Drum, to the Landlady behind her Bar. From thee only can the Manners of
Mankind be known; to which the recluse Pedant, however great his Parts, or
extensive his Learning may be, has ever been a Stranger.

Come all these, and more, if possible; for arduous is the Task I have
undertaken: And without all your Assistance, will, I find, be too heavy for me
to support. But if you all smile on my Labors, I hope still to bring them to a
happy Conclusion.

CHAP. II. What befell Mr. Jones on his Arrival in London.
THE learned Dr. Misaubin used to say, that the proper Direction to him was, To
Dr. Misaubin, in the World; intimating, that there were few People in it to
whom his great Reputation was not known, And, perhaps, upon a very nice
Examination into the Matter, we shall find that this Circumstance bears no
inconsiderable Part among the many Blessings of Grandeur.

The great Happiness of being known to Posterity, with the Hopes of which we so
delighted ourselves in the preceding Chapter, is the Portion of few. To have
the several Elements which compose our Names, as Sydenham expresses it,
repeated a thousand Years hence, is a Gift beyond the Power of Title and
Wealth; and is scarce to be purchased, unless by the Sword and the Pen. But to
avoid the scandalous Imputation, while we yet live, of being one whom Nobody
knows, (a Scandal, by the by, as old as the Days of Homer See the 2d Odyssey,
ver. 175.
) will always be the envied Portion of those, who have a legal Title either to
Honor or Estate.

From that Figure, therefore, which the Irish Peer, who brought Sophia to Town,
has already made in this History, the Reader will conclude, doubtless, it must
have been an easy Matter to have discovered his House in London, without
knowing the particular Street or Square which he inhabited, since he must have
been one whom every Body knows. To say the Truth, so it would have been to any
of those Tradesmen who are accustomed to attend the Regions of the Great: For
the Doors of the Great are generally no less easy to find, than it is difficult
to get Entrance into them. But Jones, as well as Partridge, was an entire
Stranger in London; and as he happened to arrive first in a Quarter of the
Town, the Inhabitants of which have very little Intercourse with the
Householders of Hanover or Grosvenor Square, (for he entered through Gray's Inn
Lane) so he rambled about some Time, before he could even find his Way to those
happy Mansions, where Fortune segregates from the Vulgar, those magnanimous
Heroes, the Descendants of ancient Britons, Saxons, or Danes, whose Ancestors
being born in better Days, by sundry Kinds of Merit, have entailed Riches and
Honor on their Posterity.

Jones being at length arrived at those terrestrial Elysian Fields, would now
soon have discovered his Lordship's Mansion; but the Peer unluckily quitted his
former House when he went for Ireland; and as he was just entered into a new
one, the Fame of his Equipage had not yet sufficiently blazed in the
Neighborhood: So that after a successless Enquiry 'till the Clock had struck
Eleven, Jones, at last, yielded to the Advice of Partridge, and retreated to
the Bull and Gate in Holborn, that being the Inn where he had first alighted,
and where he retired to enjoy that Kind of Repose, which usually attends
Persons in his Circumstances.

Early in the Morning he again set forth in Pursuit of Sophia; and many a weary
Step he took to no better Purpose than before. At last, whether it was that
Fortune relented, or whether it was no longer in her Power to disappoint him,
he came into the very Street which was honored by his Lordship's Residence;
and being directed to the House, he gave one gentle Rap at the Door.

The Porter, who, from the Modesty of the Knock, had conceived no high Idea of
the Person approaching, conceived but little better from the Appearance of Mr.
Jones, who was dressed in a Suit of Fustian, and had by his Side the Weapon
formerly purchased of the Sergeant; of which, though the Blade might be composed
of well-tempered Steel, the Handle was composed only of Brass, and that none of
the brightest. When Jones, therefore, enquired after the young Lady, who had
come to Town with his Lordship, this Fellow answered surlily, 'That there were
no Ladies there.' Jones then desired to see the Master of the House; but was
informed that his Lordship would see no Body that Morning. And upon growing
more pressing, the Porter said, 'He had positive Orders to let no Person in;
but if you think proper,' said he, 'to leave your Name, I will acquaint his
Lordship; and if you call another Time, you shall know when he will see you.'

Jones now declared, 'that he had very particular Business with the young Lady,
and could not depart without seeing her. Upon which the Porter, with no very
agreeable Voice or Aspect, affirmed, 'That there was no young Lady in that
House, and, consequently, none could he see; adding, Sure you are the strangest
Man I ever met with; for you will not take an Answer.'

I have often thought, that by the particular Description of Cerberus the
Porter of Hell, in the 6th Aeneid, Virgil might possibly intend to satyrize the
Porters of the great Men in his Time; the Picture, at least, resembles those
who have the Honor to attend at the Doors of our great Men. The Porter in his
Lodge, answers exactly to Cerberus in his Den, and, like him, must be appeased
by a Sop, before Access can be gained to his Master. Perhaps Jones might have
seen him in that Light, and have recollected the Passage, where the Sybil, in
order to procure an Entrance for Aeneas, presents the Keeper of the Stygian
Avenue with such a Sop. Jones, in like Manner, now began to offer a Bribe to
the human Cerberus, which a Footman overhearing, instantly advanced, and
declared, 'if Mr. Jones would give him the Sum proposed, he would conduct him
to the Lady.' Jones instantly agreed, and was forthwith conducted to the
Lodging of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, by the very Fellow who had attended the Ladies
thither the Day before.

Nothing more aggravates ill Success than the near Approach to Good. The
Gamester, who loses his Party at Piquet by a single Point, laments his bad Luck
ten Times as much as he who never came within a Prospect of the Game. So in a
Lottery, the Proprietors of the next Numbers to that which wins the great
Prize, are apt to account themselves much more unfortunate than their
Fellow-Sufferes. In short, these kind of hair-breadth Missings of Happiness,
look like the Insults of Fortune, who may be considered as thus playing Tricks
with us, and wantonly diverting herself at our Expense.

Jones, who more than once already had experienced this frolicksome Disposition
of the Heathen Goddess, was now again doomed to be tantalized in the like
Manner: For he arrived at the Door of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, about ten Minutes after
the Departure of Sophia. He now addressed himself to the Waiting Woman
belonging to Mrs. Fitzpatrick; who told him the disagreeable News, that the
Lady was gone, but could not tell him whither; and the same Answer he
afterward received from Mrs. Fitzpatrick herself. For as that Lady made no
doubt but that Mr. Jones was a Person detached from her Uncle Western, in
Pursuit of his Daughter, so she was too generous to betray her.

Though Jones had never seen Mrs. Fitzpatrick, yet he had heard that a Cousin
of Sophia was married to a Gentleman of that Name. This, however, in the
present Tumult of his Mind, never once recurred to his Memory: But when the
Footman, who had conducted him from his Lordship's, acquainted him with the
great Intimacy between the Ladies, and with their calling each other Cousin, he
then recollected the Story of the Marriage which he had formerly heard; and as
he was presently convinced that this was the same Woman, he became more
surprised at the Answer which he had received, and very earnestly desired Leave
to wait on the Lady herself; but she as positively refused him that Honor.

Jones, who, though he had never seen a Court, was better bred than most who
frequent it, was incapable of any rude or abrupt Behavior to a Lady. When he
had received, therefore, a peremptory Denial, he retired for the present,
saying to the waiting Woman, 'That if this was an improper Hour to wait on her
Lady, he would return in the Afternoon; and that he then hoped to have the
Honor of seeing her.' The Civility with which he uttered this, added to the
great Comeliness of his Person, made an Impression on the Waiting Woman, and
she could not help answering; 'Perhaps, Sir, you may: And, indeed, she
afterward said every Thing to her Mistress, which she thought most likely to
prevail on her to admit a Visit from the handsome young Gentleman; for so she
called him.'

Jones very shrewdly suspected, that Sophia herself was now with her Cousin,
and was denied to him; which he imputed to her Resentment of what had happened
at Upton. Having, therefore, dispatched Partridge to procure him Lodgings, he
remained all Day in the Street, watching the Door where he thought his Angel
lay concealed; but no Person did he see issue forth, except a Servant of the
House. And in the Evening he returned to pay his Visit to Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
which that good Lady at last condescended to admit.

There is a certain Air of natural Gentility, which it is neither in the Power
of Dress to give, nor to conceal. Mr. Jones, as has been before hinted, was
possessed of this in a very eminent Degree. He met, therefore, with a Reception
from the Lady, somewhat different from what his Apparel seemed to demand; and
after he had paid her his proper Respects, was desired to sit down.

The Reader will not, I believe, be desirous of knowing all the Particulars of
this Conversation, which ended very little to the Satisfaction of poor Jones.
For though Mrs. Fitzpatrick soon discovered the Lover, (as all Women have the
Eyes of Hawks in those Matters) yet she still thought it was such a Lover, as a
generous Friend of the Lady should not betray her to. In short, she suspected
this was the very Mr. Blifil, from whom Sophia had flown; and all the Answers
which she artfully drew from Jones, concerning Mr. Allworthy's Family,
confirmed her in this Opinion. She therefore strictly denied any Knowledge
concerning the Place whither Sophia was gone; nor could Jones obtain more than
a Permission to wait on her again the next Evening.

When Jones was departed, Mrs. Fitzpatrick communicated her Suspicion
concerning Mr. Blifil, to her Maid; who answered, 'Sure, Madam, he is too
pretty a Man, in my Opinion, for any Woman in the World to run away from. I had
rather fancy it is Mr. Jones. -- 'Mr. Jones, said the Lady, what Jones?' For
Sophia had not given the least Hint of any such Person in all their
Conversation: But Mrs. Honor had been much more communicative, and had
acquainted her Sister Abigail with the whole History of Jones, which this now
again related to her Mistress.

Mrs. Fitzpatrick no sooner received this Information, than she immediately
agreed with the Opinion of her Maid; and, what is very unaccountable, saw
Charms in the gallant, happy Lover, which she had overlooked in the slighted
Squire. 'Betty, says she, 'you are certainly in the right: He is a very pretty
Fellow, and I don't wonder that my Cousin's Maid should tell you so many Women
are fond of him. I am sorry now I did not inform him where my Cousin was: And
yet if he be so terrible a Rake as you tell me, it is a Pity she should ever
see him any more; for what but her Ruin can happen from marrying a Rake and a
Beggar against her Father's Consent. I protest, if he be such a Man as the
Wench described him to you, it is but an Office of Charity to keep her from
him; and, I am sure, it would be unpardonable in me to do otherwise, who have
tasted so bitterly of the Misfortunes attending such Marriages.'

Here she was interrupted by the Arrival of a Visitor, which was no other than
his Lordship; and as nothing passed at this Visit either new or extraordinary,
or any Ways material to this History, we shall here put an End to this Chapter.

CHAP. III. A Project of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and her Visit to Lady Bellaston.
WHEN Mrs. Fitzpatrick retired to Rest, her Thoughts were entirely taken up by
her Cousin Sophia and Mr. Jones. She was, indeed, a little offended with the
former, for the Disingenuity which she now discovered. In which Meditation she
had not long exercised her Imagination, before the following Conceit suggested
itself: That could she possibly become the Means of preserving Sophia from this
Man, and of restoring her to her Father, she should, in all human Probability,
by so great a Service to the Family, reconcile to herself both her Uncle and
her Aunt Western.

As this was one of her most favorite Wishes, so the Hope of Success seemed so
reasonable, that nothing remained but to consider of proper Methods to
accomplish her Scheme. To attempt to reason the Case with Sophia, did not
appear to her one of those Methods: For as Betty had reported from Mrs. Honor,
that Sophia had a violent Inclination to Jones, she conceived, that to dissuade
her from the Match, was an Endeavor of the same Kind as it would be, very
heartily and earnestly to entreat a Moth not to fly into a Candle.

If the Reader will please to remember, that the Acquaintance which Sophia had
with Lady Bellaston, was contracted at the House of Mrs. Western, and must have
grown at the very Time when Mrs. Fitzpatrick lived with this latter Lady, he
will want no Information, that Mrs. Fitzpatrick must have been acquainted with
her likewise. They were, besides, both equally her distant Relations.

After much Consideration, therefore, she resolved to go early in the Morning
to that Lady, and endeavor to see her, unknown to Sophia, and to acquaint her
with the whole Affair. For she did not in the least doubt, but that the prudent
Lady, who had often ridiculed romantic Love, and indiscreet Marriages, in her
Conversation, would very readily concur in her Sentiments concerning this
Match, and would lend her utmost Assistance to prevent it.

This Resolution she accordingly executed; and the next Morning before the Sun,
she huddled on her Clothes, and at a very unfashionable, unseasonable,
unvisitable Hour went to Lady Bellaston, to whom she got Access, without the
least Knowledge or Suspicion of Sophia, who though not asleep, lay at that Time
awake in her Bed, with Honor snoring by her Side.

Mrs. Fitzpatrick made many Apologies for this early, abrupt Visit, at an Hour
when, 'she said, she should not have thought of disturbing her Ladyship, but
upon Business of the utmost Consequence.' She then opened the whole Affair,
told all she had heard from Betty; and did not forget the Visit which Jones had
paid to herself the preceding Evening.

Lady Bellaston answered with a Smile, 'Then you have seen this terrible Man,
Madam; pray is he so very fine a Figure as he is represented? For Etoff
entertained me last Night almost two Hours with him. The Wench I believe is in
Love with him by Reputation.' Here the Reader will be apt to wonder, but the
Truth is that Mrs. Etoff who had the Honor to pin and unpin the Lady
Bellaston, had received complete Information concerning the said Mr. Jones, and
had faithfully conveyed the same to her Lady last Night (or rather that
Morning) while she was undressing; on which Accounts she had been detained in
her Office above the Space of an Hour and half.

The Lady indeed, though generally well enough pleased with the Narratives of
Mrs. Etoff at those Seasons, gave an extraordinary Attention to her Account of
Jones, for Honor had described him as a very handsome Fellow, and Mrs. Etoff
in her Hurry added so much to the Beauty of his Person to her Report, that Lady
Bellaston began to conceive him to be a kind of Miracle in Nature.

The Curiosity which her Woman had inspired, was now greatly increased by Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, who spoke as much in Favor of the Person of Jones, as she had
before spoken in Dispraise of his Birth, Character and Fortune.

When Lady Bellaston had heard the whole, she answered gravely, 'Indeed Madam,
this is a Matter of great Consequence. Nothing can certainly be more
commendable than the Part you act, and I shall be very glad to have my Share in
the Preservation of a young Lady of so much Merit, and for whom I have so much
Esteem.'

'Doth not your Ladyship think, says Mrs. Fitzpatrick eagerly, that it would be
the best Way to write immediately to my Uncle, and acquaint him where my Cousin
is?'

The Lady pondered a little upon this, and thus answered -- 'Why, no, Madam, I
think not. Di Western has described her Brother to me to be such a Brute, that
I cannot consent to put any Woman under his Power who has escaped from it. I
have heard he behaved like a Monster to his own Wife; for he is one of those
Wretches who think they have a Right to tyrannize over us, and from such I
shall ever esteem it the Cause of my Sex to rescue any Woman who is so
unfortunate to be under their Power. -- The Business, dear Cousin, will be only
to keep Miss Western from seeing this young Fellow, till the good Company,
which she will have an Opportunity of meeting here, give her a proper Turn.'

'If he should find her out, Madam, answered the other, your Ladyship may be
assured he will leave nothing unattempted to come at her.'

'But Madam, replied the Lady, it is impossible he should come here, -- though
indeed it is possible he may get some intelligence where she is, and then may
lurk about the House. -- I wish therefore I knew his Person.'

'Is there no Way, Madam, by which I could have a Sight of him? For otherwise
you know, Cousin, she may contrive to see him here without my Knowledge.' Mrs.
Fitzpatrick answered, 'that he had threatened her with another Visit that
Afternoon, and that in her Ladyship pleased to do her the Honor of calling
upon her then, she would hardly fail of seeing him between six and seven, and
if he came earlier, she would, by some Means or other, detain him till her
Ladyship's Arrival.' -- Lady Bellaston replied, 'she would come the Moment she
could get from Dinner, which she supposed would be by seven at farthest, for
that it was absolutely necessary she should be acquainted with his Person. Upon
my Word, Madam, says she, it was very good to take this Care of Miss Western,
but common Humanity as well as Regard to our Family requires it of us both, for
it would be a dreadful Match indeed.'

Mrs. Fitzpatrick failed not to make a proper Return to the Compliment which
Lady Bellaston had bestowed on her Cousin, and after some little immaterial
Conversation withdrew, and getting as fast as she could into her Chair unseen
by Sophia or Honor, returned home.

CHAP. IV. Which consists of Visiting.
MR. Jones had walked within Sight of a certain Door during the whole Day,
which, though one of the shortest, appeared to him to be one of the longest in
the whole Year. At length the Clock having struck five he returned to Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, who, though it was a full Hour earlier than the decent Time of
visiting, received him very civilly; but still persisted in her Ignorance
concerning Sophia.

Jones in asking for his Angel, had dropped the Word Cousin; upon which Mrs.
Fitzpatrick said, 'Then, Sir, you know we are related, and as we are, you will
permit me the Right of enquiring into the Particulars of your Business with my
Cousin.' Here Jones hesitated a good while, and at last answered, He had a
considerable Sum of Money of hers in his Hands, which he desired to deliver to
her. He then produced the Pocketbook, and acquainted Mrs. Fitzpatrick with the
Contents, and with the Method in which they came into his Hands. He had scarce
finished his Story when a most violent Noise shook the whole House. To attempt
to describe this Noise to those who have heard it would be in vain, and to aim
at giving any Idea of it to those who have never heard the like, would be still
more vain: For it may be truly said,

-- Non acuta
Sic geminant Corybantes Era.
The Priests of Cybele do not so rattle their sounding Brass. In short a
Footman knocked, or rather thundered at the Door. Jones was a little surprised
at the Sound, having never heard it before; but Mrs. Fitzpatrick very calmly
said, that as some Company were coming, she could not make him any Answer now;
but if he pleased to stay till they were gone, she intimated she had something
to say to him.

The Door of the Room now flew open, and, after pushing in her Hoop sideways
before her, entered Lady Bellaston, who having first made a very low Curtesy to
Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and as low a one to Mr. Jones, was ushered to the upper End
of the Room.

We mention these minute Matters for the Sake of some Country Ladies of our
Acquaintance, who think it contrary to the Rules of Modesty to bend their Knees
to a Man.

The Company were hardly well settled, before the Arrival of the Peer lately
mentioned caused a fresh Di^^urbance and a Repetition of Ceremonials.

^here being over, the Conversation began to be (as the Phrase is) extremely
brilliant. However, as nothing past in it which can be thought material to this
History, or, indeed, very material in itself, I shall omit the Relation; the
rather as I have known some very fine polite Conversation grow extremely dull,
when transcribed into Books, or repeated on the Stage. Indeed this mental
Repast is a Dainty, of which those who are excluded from polite Assemblies,
must be contented to remain as ignorant as they must of the several Dainties of
French Cookery, which are only served at the Tables of the Great. To say the
Truth, as neither of these are adapted to every Taste, they might both be often
thrown away on the Vulgar.

Poor Jones was rather a Spectator of this elegant Scene, than an Actor in it;
for though in the short Interval before the Peer's Arrival, Lady Bellaston
first, and afterward Mrs. Fitzpatrick, had addressed some of their Discourse
to him; yet no sooner was the noble Lord entered, than he engrossed the whole
Attention of the two Ladies to himself; and as he took no more Notice of Jones
than if no such Person had been present, unless by now and then staring at him,
the Ladies followed his Example.

The Company had now staid so long, that Mrs. Fitzpatrick plainly perceived
they all designed to stay out each other. She therefore resolved to rid herself
of Jones, he being the Visitant, to whom she thought the least Ceremony was
due. Taking therefore an Opportunity of a Cessation of Chat, she addressed
herself gravely to him, and said, 'Sir, I shall not possibly be able to give
you an Answer Tonight, as to that Business; but if you please to leave Word
where I may send to you Tomorrow.' --

Jones had natural, but not artificial good Breeding. Instead therefore of
communicating the Secret of ^^ is Lodgings to a Servant, he acquainted the Lady
^e^self with it particularly, and soon after very ceremoniously withdrew.

He was no sooner gone, than the great Personages who had taken no Notice of
him present, began to take much Notice of him in his Absence; but if the Reader
has already excused us from relating the more brilliant Part of this
Conversation, he will surely be very ready to excuse the Repetition of what may
be called vulgar Abuse: Though, perhaps, it may be material to our History to
mention an Observation of Lady Bellaston, who took her Leave in a few Minutes
after him, and then said to Mrs. Fitzpatrick, at her Departure. 'I am satisfied
on the Account of my Cousin, she can be in no Danger from this Fellow.'

Our History shall follow the Example of Lady Bellaston, and take Leave of the
present Company, which was now reduced to two Persons; between whom, as nothing
passed, which in the least concerns us or our Reader, we shall not suffer
ourselves to be diverted by it from Matters which must seem of more Consequence
to all those who are at all interested in the Affairs of our Hero.

CHAP. V. An Adventure which happened to Mr. Jones, at his Lodgings, with some
Account of a young Gentleman who lodged there, and of the Mistress of the
House, and her two Daughters.
THE next Morning as early as it was decent, Jones attended at Mrs.
Fitzpatrick's Door, where he was answered that the Lady was not at Home; an
Answer which surprised him the more, as he had walked backwards and forwards in
the Street from Break of Day; and if she had gone out, he must have seen her.
This Answer, however, he was obliged to receive, and not only now, but to five
several Visits which he made her that Day. To be plain with the Reader, the
noble Peer, had from some Reason or other, perhaps from a Regard for the Lady's
Honor, insisted that she should not see Mr. Jones, whom he looked on as a
Scrub, any more; and the Lady had complied in making that Promise to which we
now see her so strictly adhere.

But as our gentle Reader may possibly have a better Opinion of the young
Gentleman than her Ladyship, and may even have some Concern, should it be
apprehended, that during this unhappy Separation from Sophia, he took up his
Residence either at an Inn, or in the Street; we shall now give an Account of
his Lodging, which was indeed in a very reputable House, and in a very good
Part of the Town.

Mr. Jones then had often heard Mr. Allworthy mention the Gentlewoman at whose
House he used to lodge when he was in Town. This Person, who as Jones likewise
knew, lived in Bond-Street, was the Widow of a Clergyman, and was left by him
at his Decease, in Possession of two Daughters, and of a complete Set of
Manuscript Sermons.

Of these two Daughters, Nancy, the elder, was now arrived at the Age of
seventeen, and Betty, the younger at that of ten.

Hither Jones had dispatched Partridge, and in this House he was provided with
a Room for himself in the second Floor, and with one for Partridge in the
fourth.

The first Floor was inhabited by one of those young Gentlemen, who, in the
last Age were called Men of Wit and Pleasure about Town, and properly enough:
For as Men are usually denominated from their Business or Profession, so
Pleasure may be said to have been the only Business or Profession of those
Gentlemen to whom Fortune had made all useful Occupations unnecessary.
Play Houses, Coffee-Houses and Taverns were the Scenes of their Rendezvous, Wit
and Humor were the Entertainment of their looser Hours, and Love was the
Business of their more serious Moments. Wine and the Muses conspired to kindle
the brightest Flames in their Breasts; nor did they only admire, but some were
able to celebrate the Beauty they admired, and all to judge of the Merit of
such Compositions.

Such therefore were properly called the Men of Wit and Pleasure; but I
question whether the same Appellation may, with the same Propriety, be given to
those young Gentlemen of our Times, who have the same Ambition to be
distinguished for Parts. Wit certainly they have nothing to do with. To give
them their due, they soar a Step higher than their Predecessors, and may be
called Men of Wisdom and Virtue (take heed you do not read Virtue). Thus at an
Age when the Gentlemen abovementioned employed their Time in toasting the
Charms of a Woman, or in making Sonnets in her Praise; in giving their Opinion
of a Play at the Theater, or of a Poem at Will's or Button's; these Gentlemen
are considering of Methods to bribe a Corporation, or meditating Speeches for
the House of Commons, or rather for the Magazines. But the Science of Gaming is
that which above all others employs their Thoughts. These are the Studies of
their graver Hours, while for their Amusements they have the vast Circle of
Connoisseurship, Painting, Music, Statuary, and natural Philosophy, or rather
unnatural, which deals in the Wonderful, and knows nothing of Nature, except
her Monsters and Imperfections.

When Jones had spent the whole Day in vain Enquiries after Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
he returned at last disconsolate to his Apartment. Here while he was venting
his Grief in private, he heard a violent Uproar below Stairs; and soon after a
female Voice begged him for Heaven's Sake to come and prevent Murder. Jones,
who was never backward on any Occasion, to help the Distressed, immediately ran
down Stairs; when stepping into the Dining Room, whence all the Noise issued,
he beheld the young Gentleman of Wisdom and Virtue just before mentioned, pinned
close to the Wall by his Footman, and a young Woman standing by, wringing her
Hands, and crying out, 'He will be murdered, he will be murdered; and indeed
the poor Gentleman seemed in some Danger of being choked,' when Jones flew
hastily to his Assistance, and rescued him just as he was breathing his last,
from the unmerciful Clutches of the Enemy.

Though the Fellow had received several Kicks and Cuffs from the little
Gentleman, who had more Spirit than Strength, he had made it a kind of Scruple
of Conscience to strike his Master, and would have contented himself with only
choking him; but toward Jones he bore no such Respect: He no sooner therefore
found himself a little roughly handled by his new Antagonist, than he gave him
one of those Punches in the Guts, which, though the Spectators at Broughton's
Amphitheatre have such exquisite Delight in Seeing them, convey but very little
Pleasure in the Feeling.

The lusty Youth had no sooner received this Blow, than he meditated a most
grateful Return; and now ensued a Combat between Jones and the Footman, which
was very fierce, but short; for this Fellow was no more able to contend with
Jones, than his Master had before been to contend with him.

And now Fortune, according to her usual Custom, reversed the Face of Affairs,
the former Victor lay breathless on the Ground, and the vanquished Gentleman
had recovered Breath enough to thank Mr. Jones for his seasonable Assistance:
He received likewise the hearty Thanks of the young Woman present, who was
indeed no other than Miss Nancy, the eldest Daughter of the House.

The Footman having now recovered his Legs, shook his Head at Jones, and with a
sagacious Look, cried, -- O d -- n me, I Will have nothing more to do with you,
you have been upon the Stage, or I am d -- nably mistaken: And indeed we may
forgive this his Suspicion; for such was the Agility and Strength of our Hero,
that he was perhaps a Match for one of the first Rate Boxers, and could with
great Ease, have beaten all the muffled Lest Posterity should be puzzled by
this Epithet, I think proper to explain it by an Advertisement which was
published Feb. 1. 1747. N. B. Mr. Broughton proposes, with proper Assistance,
to open an Academy at his House in the Hay-Market, for the Instruction of those
who are willing to be initiated in the Mystery of Boxing; where the whole
Theory and Practice of that truly British Art, with all the various Stops,
Blows, Cross-Buttocks, etc. incident to Combatants, will be fully taught and
explained; and that Persons of Quality and Distinction may not be deterred from
entering into a Course of these Lectures, they will be given with the utmost
Tenderness and Regard to the Delicacy of the Frame and Constitution of the
Pupil, for which Reason Mufflers are provided, that will effectually secure
them from the Inconveniency of black Eyes, broken Jaws, and bloody Noses.


Graduates of Mr. Broughton's School.

His Master foaming with Wrath, ordered his Man immediately to strip, to which
the latter very readily agreed, on Condition of receiving his Wages. This
Condition was presently complied with, and the Fellow was discharged.

And now the young Gentleman whose Name was Nightingale, very strenuously
insisted that his Deliverer should take Part of a Bottle of Wine with him; to
which Jones, after much Entreaty, consented; though more out of Complaisance than
Inclination; for the Uneasiness of his Mind fitted him very little for
Conversation at this Time. Miss Nancy likewise, who was the only Female then in
the House, her Mamma and Sister being gone to the Play, condescended to favor
them with her Company.

When the Bottle and Glasses were on the Table, the Gentleman began to relate
the Occasion of the preceding Disturbance.

'I hope, Sir, said he to Jones, you will not, from this Accident, conclude,
that I make a Custom of striking my Servants; for I assure you this is the
first Time I have been guilty of it in my Remembrance, and I have passed by
many provoking Faults in this very Fellow, before he could provoke me to it;
but when you hear what has happened this Evening, you will, I believe, think
me excuseable. I happened to come home several Hours before my usual Time, when
I found four Gentlemen of the Cloth at Whisk by my Fire; -- and my Hoyle, Sir,
-- my best Hoyle, which cost me a Guinea, lying open on the Table, with a
Quantity of Porter spilt on one of the most material Leaves of the whole Book.
This, you will allow, was provoking; but I said nothing till the rest of the
honest Company were gone, and then gave the Fellow a gentle Rebuke, who,
instead of expressing any Concern, made me a pert Answer, '"That Servants must
have their Diversions as well as other People; that he was sorry for the
Accident which had happened to the Book; but that several of his Acquaintance
had bought the same for a Shilling; and that I might stop as much in his Wages
if I pleased:" 'I now gave him a severer Reprimand than before, when the Rascal
had the Insolence to -- In short he imputed my early coming Home to -- In
short, he cast a Reflection, -- He mentioned the Name of a young Lady, in a
Manner -- In such a Manner that incensed me beyond all Patience, and in my
Passion, I struck him.'

Jones answered, 'That he believed no Person living would blame him; for my
Part, said he, I confess I should on the last mentioned Provocation, have done
the same Thing.'

Our Company had not sat long before they were joined by the Mother and
Daughter, at their Return from the Play. And now they all spent a very cheerful
Evening together, for all but Jones were heartily merry, and even he put on as
much constrained Mirth as possible. Indeed half his natural Flow of animal
Spirits, joined to the Sweetness of his Temper, was sufficient to make a most
amiable Companion; and notwithstanding the Heaviness of his Heart, so agreeable
did he make himself on the present Occasion, that at their breaking up, the
young Gentleman earnestly desired his further Acquaintance. Miss Nancy was well
pleased with him; and the Widow, quite charmed with her new Lodger, invited him
with the other, next Morning to Breakfast.

Jones, on his Part, was no less satisfied. As for Miss Nancy, though a very
little Creature, she was extremely pretty, and the Widow had all the Charms
which can adorn a Woman near fifty. As she was one of the most innocent
Creatures in the World, so she was one of the most cheerful. She never thought,
nor spoke, nor wished any ill, and had constantly that Desire of pleasing,
which may be called the happiest of all Desires in this, that it scarce ever
fails of attaining its Ends, when not disgraced by Affectation. In short,
though her Power was very small, she was in her Heart one of the warmest
Friends. She had been a most affectionate Wife, and was a most fond and tender
Mother.

As our History does not, like a News-Paper, give great Characters to People
who never were heard of before, nor will ever be heard of again; the Reader may
hence conclude, that this excellent Woman will hereafter appear to be of some
Importance in our History.

Nor was Jones a little pleased with the young Gentleman himself, whose Wine he
had been drinking. He thought he discerned in him much good Sense, though a
little too much tainted with Town Foppery; but what recommended him most to
Jones were some Sentiments of great Generosity and Humanity, which occasionally
dropped from him; and particularly many Expressions of the highest
Disinterestedness in the Affair of Love. On which Subject the young Gentleman
delivered himself in a Language which might have very well become an Arcadian
Shepherd of Old, and which appeared very extraordinary when proceeding from the
Lips of a modern fine Gentleman, but he was only one by Imitation, and meant by
Nature for a much better Character.

CHAP. VI. What arrived while the Company were at Breakfast, with some Hints
concerning the Government of Daughters.
OUR Company brought together in the Morning the same good Inclinations toward
each other, with which they had separated the Evening before; but poor Jones
was extreme disconsolate; for he had just received Information from Partridge,
that Mrs. Fitzpatrick had left her Lodging, and that he could not learn whither
she was gone. This News highly affected him, and his Countenance, as well as
his Behavior, in Defiance of all his Endeavors to the contrary, betrayed
manifest Indications of a disordered Mind.

The Discourse turned at present, as before, on Love; and Mr. Nightingale again
expressed many of those warm, generous, and disinterested Sentiments upon this
Subject, which wise and sober Men call romantic, but which wise and sober Women
generally regard in a better Light. Mrs. Miller, (for so the Mrs. of the House
was called) greatly approved these Sentiments; but when the young Gentleman
appealed to Miss Nancy, she answered only, 'That she believed the Gentleman who
had spoke the least, was capable of feeling the most.'

This Compliment was so apparently directed to Jones, that we should have been
sorry had he passed it by unregarded. He made her indeed a very polite Answer,
and concluded with an oblique Hint, that her own Silence subjected her to a
Suspicion of the same Kind: For indeed she had scarce opened her Lips either
now, or the last Evening.

'I am glad Nanny, says Mrs. Miller, the Gentleman has made the Observation; I
protest I am almost of his Opinion. What can be the Matter with you Child? I
never saw such an Alteration. What is become of all your Gayety? Would you
think, Sir, I used to call her my little Prattler. She has not spoke twenty
Words this Week.'

Here their Conversation was interrupted by the Entrance of a Maidservant, who
brought a Bundle in her Hands, which, she said, 'was delivered by a Porter for
Mr. Jones.' She added, 'that the Man immediately went away, saying, it required
no Answer.'

Jones expressed some Surprise on this Occasion, and declared it must be some
Mistake: But the Maid persisting that she was certain of the Name, all the
Women were desirous of having the Bundle immediately opened; which Operation
was at length performed by little Betsy, with the Consent of Mr. Jones; and the
Contents were found to be a Domino, a Mask, and a Masquerade Ticket.

Jones was now more positive than ever, in asserting, that these Things must
have been delivered by Mistake; and Mrs. Miller herself expressed some Doubt,
and said, 'she knew not what to think.' But when Mr. Nightingale was asked, he
delivered a very different Opinion. 'All I can conclude from it, Sir,' said he,
'is, that you are a very happy Man: For I make no doubt but these were sent you
by some Lady whom you will have the Happiness of meeting at the Masquerade.'

Jones had not a sufficient Degree of Vanity to entertain any such flattering
Imagination; nor did Mrs. Miller herself give much Assent to what Mr.
Nightingale had said, 'till Miss Nancy having lifted up the Domino, a Card
dropped from the Sleeve, in which was written as follows:

To Mr. Jones.
The Queen of the Fairies sends you this,
Use her Favors not amiss.

Mrs. Miller and Miss Nancy now both agreed with Mr. Nightingale; nay, Jones
himself was almost persuaded to be of the same Opinion. And as no other Lady
but Mrs. Fitzpatrick, he thought, knew his Lodging, he began to flatter himself
with some Hopes that it came from her, and that he might possibly see his
Sophia. These Hopes had surely very little Foundation; but as the Conduct of
Mr. Fitzpatrick, in not seeing him according to her Promise, and in quitting
her Lodgings, had been very odd and unaccountable, he conceived some faint
Hopes, that she (of whom he had formerly heard a very whimsical Character)
might possibly intend to do him that Service, in a strange Manner, which she
declined doing by more ordinary Methods. To say the Truth, as nothing certain
could be concluded from so odd and uncommon an Incident, he had the greater
Latitude to draw what imaginary Conclusions from it he pleased. As his Temper
therefore was naturally sanguine, he indulged it on this Occasion, and his
Imagination worked up a thousand Conceits, to favor and support his
Expectations of meeting his dear Sophia in the Evening.

Reader, if thou have any good Wishes toward me, I will fully repay them, by
wishing thee to be possessed of this sanguine Disposition of Mind: Since, after
having read much, and considered long on that Subject of Happiness which has
employed so many great Pens, I am almost inclined to fix it in the Possession
of this Temper; which puts us; in a Manner, out of the Reach of Fortune, and
makes us happy without her Assistance. Indeed the Sensations of Pleasure it
gives are much more constant, as well as much keener than those which that
blind Lady bestows; Nature having wisely contrived, that some Satiety and
Languor should be annexed to all our real Enjoyments, lest we should be so
taken up by them, as to be stopped from further Pursuits. I make no Manner of
doubt but that, in this Light, we may see the imaginary future Chancellor just
called to the Bar, the Archbishop in Crape, and the Prime Minister at the Tail
of an Opposition, more truly happy than those who are invested with all the
Power and Profit of these respective Offices.

Mr. Jones having now determined to go to the Masquerade that Evening, Mr.
Nightingale offered to conduct him thither. The young Gentleman, at the same
Time, offered Tickets to Miss Nancy and her Mother; but the good Woman would
not accept them. She said, 'She did not conceive the Harm which some People
imagined in a Masquerade; but that such extravagant Diversions were only proper
for Persons of Quality and Fortune, and not for young Women who were to get
their Living, and could, at best, hope to be married to a good Tradesman.'

-- 'A Tradesman! cries Nightingale, you shall not undervalue my Nancy. There is
not a Nobleman upon Earth above her Merit.' 'O fie! Mr. Nightingale,' answered
Mrs. Miller, 'you must not fill the Girl's Head with such Fancies: But if it
was her good Luck (says the Mother with a Simper) to find a Gentleman of your
generous Way of thinking, I hope she would make a better Return to his
Generosity, than to give her Mind up to extravagant Pleasures. Indeed where
young Ladies bring great Fortunes themselves, they have some Right to insist on
spending what is their own: and on that Account, I have heard the Gentlemen
say, a Man has sometimes a better Bargain with a poor Wife, than with a rich
one. -- But let my Daughters marry whom they will, I shall endeavor to make
them Blessings to their Husbands: -- I beg, therefore, I may hear of no more
Masquerades. Nancy is, I am certain, too good a Girl to desire to go; for she
must remember when you carried her thither last Year, it almost turned her
Head, and she did not return to herself, or to her Needle, in a Month
afterward.'

Though a gentle Sigh which stole from the Bosom of Nancy, seemed to argue some
secret Disapprobation of these Sentiments, she did not dare openly to oppose
them. For as this good Woman had all the Tenderness, so she had preserved all
the Authority of a Parent; and as her Indulgence to the Desires of her
Children, was only restrained, by her Fears for their Safety and future
Welfare, so she never suffered those Commands, which proceeded from such Fears,
to be either disobeyed or disputed. And this the young Gentleman who had lodged
two Years in the House, knew so well, that he presently acquiesced in the
Refusal.

Mr. Nightingale, who grew every Minute fonder of Jones, was very desirous of
his Company that Day to Dinner at the Tavern, where he offered to introduce him
to some of his Acquaintance; but Jones begged to be excused, 'as his Clothes,
he said, were not yet come to Town.'

To confess the Truth, Mr. Jones was now in a Situation, which sometimes
happens to be the Case of young Gentlemen of much better Figure than himself.
In short, he had not one Penny in his Pocket; a Situation in much greater
Credit among the ancient Philosophers, than among the modern wise Men who live
in Lombard Street, or those who frequent White's Chocolate House. And, perhaps,
the great Honors which those Philosophers have ascribed to an empty Pocket,
may be one of the Reasons of that high Contempt in which they are held in the
aforesaid Street and Chocolate-House.

Now if the ancient Opinion, that Men might live very comfortably on Virtue
only, be, as the modern wise Men just abovementioned pretend to have
discovered, a notorious Error; no less false is, I apprehend, that Position of
some Writers of Romance, that a Man can live altogether on Love: For however
delicious Repasts this may afford to some of our Senses or Appetites, it is
most certain it can afford none to others. Those, therefore, who have placed
too great a Confidence in such Writers, have experienced their Error when it
was too late; and have found that Love was no more capable of allaying Hunger,
than a Rose is capable of delighting the Ear, or a Violin of gratifying the
Smell.

Notwithstanding, therefore, all the Delicacies which Love had set before him,
namely, the Hopes of seeing Sophia at the Masquerade; on which, however
ill-founded his Imagination might be, he had voluptuously feasted during the
whole Day, the Evening no sooner came, than Mr. Jones began to languish for
some Food of a grosser Kind. Partridge discovered this by Intution, and took
the Occasion to give some oblique Hints concerning the Bank-bill, and when
those were rejected with Disdain, he collected Courage enough once more to
mention a Return to Mr. Allworthy.

'Partridge, cries Jones, you cannot see my Fortune in a more desperate Light
than I see it myself; and I begin heartily to repent, that I suffered you to
leave a Place, where you was settled, and to follow me. However, I insist now
on your returning Home; and for the Expense and Trouble which you have so
kindly put yourself to on my Account, all the Clothes I left behind in your
Care, I desire you would take as your own. I am sorry I can make you no other
Acknowledgment.'

He spoke these Words with so pathetic an Accent, that Partridge, among whose
Vices Ill Nature or Hardness of Heart were not numbered, burst into Tears; and
after swearing he would not quit him in his Distress, he began with the most
earnest Entreaties to urge his return Home. 'For Heaven's Sake, Sir,' says he,
'do but consider: What can your Honor do? How is it possible you can live in
this Town without Money? Do what you will, Sir, or go wherever you please, I am
resolved not to desert you. -- But pray, Sir, consider, -- Do pray, Sir, for
your own Sake, take it into your Consideration; and I Am sure,' says he, 'that
your own Good-Sense will bid you return Home.'

'How often shall I tell thee, answered Jones, that I have no Home to return
to. Had I any Hopes that Mr. Allworthy's Doors would be open to receive me, I
want no Distress to urge me: -- Nay, there is no other Cause upon Earth, which
could detain me a Moment from flying to his Presence, but, alas! that I am for
ever banished from it. His last Words were, -- O Partridge, they still ring in
my Ears -- His last Words were, when he gave me a Sum of Money, what it was I
know not, but considerable I Am sure it was. -- His last Words were -- I am
resolved from this Day forward, on no Account, to converse with you any more.'

Here Passion stopped the Mouth of Jones; as Surprise, for a Moment, did that of
Partridge: But he soon recovered the Use of Speech, and after a short Preface,
in which he declared he had no Inquisitiveness in his Temper, enquired, what
Jones meant by a considerable Sum; he knew not how much; and what was become of
the Money?

In both these Points he now received full Satisfaction; on which he was
proceeding to comment, when he was interrupted by a Message from Mr.
Nightingale, who desired his Master's Company in his Apartment.

When the two Gentlemen were both attired for the Masquerade, and Mr.
Nightingale had given Orders for Chairs to be sent for, a Circumstance of
Distress occurred to Jones, which will appear very ridiculous to many of my
Readers. This was how to procure a Shilling; but if such Readers will reflect a
little on what they have themselves felt from the Want of a thousand Pound, or,
perhaps, of ten or twenty, to execute a favorite Scheme, they will have a
perfect Idea of what Mr. Jones felt on this Occasion. For this Sum, therefore,
he applied to Partridge, which was the first he had permitted him to advance,
and was the last he intended that poor Fellow should advance in his Service. To
say the Truth, Partridge had lately made no Offer of this Kind; whether it was
that he desired to see the Bank-bill broke in upon, or that Distress should
prevail on Jones to return Home, or from what other Motive it proceeded, I will
not determine.

CHAP. VII. Containing the whole Humors of a Masquerade.
OUR Cavaliers now arrived at that Temple, where Heydegger, the great Arbiter
Deliciarum, the great High Priest of Pleasure presides; and, like other Heathen
Priests, imposes on his Votaries by the pretended Presence of the Deity, when
in reality no such Deity is there.

Mr. Nightingale having taken a Turn or two with his Companion, soon left him,
and walked off with a Female, saying, 'Now you are here, Sir, you must beat
about for your own Game.'

Jones began to entertain strong Hopes that his Sophia was present; and these
Hopes gave him more Spirits than the Lights, the Music, and the Company; though
these are pretty strong Antidotes against the Spleen. He now accosted every
Woman he saw, whose Stature, Shape, or Air, bore any Resemblance to his Angel.
To all of whom he endeavored to say something smart, in order to engage an
Answer, by which he might discover that Voice which he thought it impossible he
should mistake. Some of these answered by a Question, in a squeaking Voice, Do
you know me? Much the greater Numbers said, I don't know you, Sir; and nothing
more. Some called him an impertinent Fellow; some made him no Answer at all;
some said, Indeed I don't know your Voice, and I shall have nothing to say to
you; and many gave him as kind Answers as he could wish, but not in the Voice
he desired to hear.

Whilst he was talking with one of these last, (who was in the Habit of a
Shepherdess) a Lady in a Domino came up to him, and slapping him on the
Shoulder, whispered him, at the same Time, in the Ear, 'If you talk any longer
with that Trollop, I will acquaint Miss Western.'

Jones no sooner heard that Name, than, immediately quitting his former
Companion, he applied to the Domino, begging and entreating her to show him the
Lady she had mentioned, if she was then in the Room.

The Mask walked hastily to the upper end of the innermost Apartment before she
spoke, and then, instead of answering him, sat down, and declared she was
tired. Jones sat down by her, and still persisted in his Entreaties; at last
the Lady coldly answered, 'I imagined Mr. Jones had been a more discerning
Lover, than to suffer any Disguise to conceal his Mistress from him. Is she
here then, Madam? replied Jones, with much Vehemence.' Upon which the Lady
cried, -- 'Hush, Sir, you will be observed -- I promise you, upon my Honor,
Miss Western is not here.'

Jones now taking the Mask by the Hand, fell to entreating her in the most
earnest Manner, to acquaint him where he might find Sophia: And when he could
obtain no direct Answer, he began to upbraid her gently for having disappointed
him the Day before; and concluded, saying, 'Indeed, my good Fairy Queen, I know
your Majesty very well, notwithstanding the affected Disguise of your Voice.
Indeed, Mrs. Fitzpatrick, it is a little cruel to divert yourself at the
Expense of my Torments.'

The Mask answered, 'Though you have so ingeniously discovered me, I must still
speak in the same Voice, lest I should be known by others. And do you think,
good Sir, that I have no greater Regard for my Cousin, than to assist in
carrying on an Affair between you two, which must end in her Ruin, as well as
your own? Besides, I promise you, my Cousin is not mad enough to consent to her
own Destruction, if you are so much her Enemy as to tempt her to it.'

'Alas, Madam, said Jones, you little know my Heart, when you call me an Enemy
of Sophia.'

'And yet to ruin any one, cries the other, you will allow, is the Act of an
Enemy; and when by the same Act you must knowingly and certainly bring Ruin on
yourself, is it not Folly or Madness, as well as Guilt? Now, Sir, my Cousin
has very little more than her Father will please to give her; very little for
one of her Fashion, -- you know him, and you know your own Situation.'

Jones vowed he had no such Design on Sophia, 'That he would rather suffer the
most violent of Deaths than sacrifice her Interest to his Desires. He said, he
knew how unworthy he was of her every Way; that he had long ago resolved to
quit all such aspiring Thoughts, but that some strange Accidents had made him
desirous to see her once more, when he promised he would take Leave of her for
ever. No, Madam, concluded he, my Love is not of that base Kind which seeks its
own Satisfaction, at the Expense of what is most dear to its Object. I would
sacrifice every Thing to the Possession of my Sophia, but Sophia herself.'

Though the Reader may have already conceived no very sublime Idea of the
Virtue of the Lady in the Mask; and though possibly she may hereafter appear not
to deserve one of the first Characters of her Sex; yet, it is certain, these
generous Sentiments made a strong Impression upon her, and greatly added to the
Affection she had before conceived for our young Hero.

The Lady now, after a Silence of a few Moments, said, 'She did not see his
Pretensions to Sophia so much in the Light of Presumption, as of Imprudence.
Young Fellows, says she, can never have too aspiring Thoughts. I love Ambition
in a young Man, and I would have you cultivate it as much as possible. Perhaps
you may succeed with those who are infinitely superior in Fortune, nay, I am
convinced there are Women, -- but don't you think me a strong Creature, Mr.
Jones, to be thus giving Advice to a Man, with whom I am so little acquainted,
and one with whose Behavior to me I have so little Reason to be pleased?'

Here Jones began to apologize, and to hope he had not offended in any thing he
had said of her Cousin. -- To which the Mask answered, 'And are you so little
versed in the Sex, to imagine you can well affront a Lady more, than by
entertaining her with your Passion for another Woman? If the Fairy Queen had
had no better Opinion of your Gallantry, she would scarce have appointed you to
meet her at a Masquerade.'

Jones had never less Inclination to an Amor than at present; but Gallantry to
the Ladies was among his Principles of Honor; and he held it as much incumbent
on him to accept a Challenge to Love, as if it had been a Challenge to Fight.
Nay, his very Love to Sophia made it necessary for him to keep well with the
Lady, as he made no doubt but she was capable of bringing him into the Presence
of the other.

He began therefore to make a very warm Answer to her last Speech, when a Mask
in the Character of an old Woman, joined them. This Mask was one of those
Ladies who go to a Masquerade only to vent Ill Nature, by telling People rude
Truths, and by endeavoring, as the Phrase is, to spoil as much Sport as they
are able. This good Lady therefore, having observed Jones, and his Friend, whom
she well knew, in close Consultation together in a Corner of the Room,
concluded she could no where satisfy her Spleen better than by interrupting
them. She attacked them therefore, and soon drove them from their Retirement;
nor was she contented with this, but pursued them to every Place which they
shifted to avoid her; till Mr. Nightingale seeing the Distress of his Friend,
at last relieved him, and engaged the old Woman in another Pursuit.

While Jones and his Mask were walking together about the Room, to rid
themselves of the Teazer, he observed his Lady speak to several Masks, with the
same Freedom of Acquaintance as if they had been barefaced. He could not help
expressing his Surprise at this, saying, 'Sure, Madam, you must have infinite
Discernment to know People in all Disguises.' To which the Lady answered, 'You
cannot conceive any Thing more insipid and childish than a Masquerade to the
People of Fashion, who in general know one another as well here, as when they
meet in an Assembly or a Drawing Room; nor will any Woman of Condition converse
with a Person with whom she is not acquainted. In short, the Generality of
Persons whom you see here, may more properly be said to kill Time in this
Place, than in any other; and generally retire from hence more tired than from
the longest Sermon. To say the Truth, I begin to be in that Situation myself,
and if I have any Faculty at guessing, you are not much better pleased. I
protest it would be almost Charity in me to go Home for your Sake.' 'I know but
one Charity equal to it, cries Jones, and that is to suffer me to wait on you
Home. Sure, answered the Lady, you have a strange opinion of me, to imagine,
that upon such an Acquaintance, I would let you into my Doors at this Time
o'Night. I fancy you impute the Friendship I have shown my Cousin, to some
other Motive. Confess honestly; don't you consider this contrived Interview as
little better than a downright Assignation? Are you used, Mr. Jones, to make
these sudden Conquests? I am not used, Madam, said Jones, to submit to such
sudden Conquests; but as you have taken my Heart by Surprise, the rest of my
Body has a Right to follow; so you must pardon me if I resolve to attend you
wherever you go.' He accompanied these Words with some proper Actions; upon
which the Lady, after a gentle Rebuke, and saying their Familiarity would be
observed, told him, 'She was going to sup with an Acquaintance, whither she
hoped he would not follow her; for if you should, said she, I shall be thought
an unaccountable Creature, though my Friend indeed is not censorious, yet I
hope you will not follow me: I protest I shall not know what to say, if you do.'

The Lady presently after quitted the Masquerade, and Jones, notwithstanding
the severe Prohibition he had received, presumed to attend her. He was now
reduced to the same Dilemma we have mentioned before, namely, the want of
Shilling, and could not relieve it by borrowing as before. He therefore walked
boldly on after the Chair in which his Lady rode, pursued by a grand Huzza from
all the Chairmen present, who wisely take the best Care they can to
discountenance all walking afoot by their Betters. Luckily however the Gentry
who attend at the Opera-House were too busy to quit their Stations, and as the
Lateness of the Hour prevented him from meeting many of their Brethren in the
Street, he proceeded without Molestation, in a Dress, which, at another Season,
would have certainly raised a Mob at his Heels.

The Lady was set down in a Street, not far from Hanover-Square, where the Door
being presently opened, she was carried in, and the Gentleman, without any
Ceremony, walked in after her.

Jones and his Companion were now together in a very well-furnished and
well-warm'd Room, when the Female still speaking in her Masquerade Voice, said,
she was surprised at her Friend, who must absolutely have forgot her
Appointment; at which after venting much Resentment, she suddenly expressed some
Apprehension from Jones, and asked him what the World would think of their
having been alone together in a House at that Time of Night? But instead of a
direct Answer to so important a Question, Jones began to be very importunate
with the Lady to unmask, and at length having prevailed, there appeared not
Mrs. Fitzpatrick, but the Lady Bellaston herself.

It would be tedious to give the particular Conversation which consisted of
very common and ordinary Occurrences, and which lasted from two till six
o'Clock in the Morning. It is sufficient to mention all of it that is any wise
material to this History. And this was a Promise that the Lady would endeavor
to find out Sophia, and in a few Days bring him to an Interview with her, on
Condition that he would then take his Leave of her. When this was thoroughly
settled, and a second Meeting in the Evening appointed at the same Place, they
separated; the Lady returned to her House, and Jones to his Lodgings.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a Scene of Distress, which will appear very
extraordinary to most of our Readers.
JONES having refreshed himself with a few Hours Sleep, summoned Partridge to
his Presence; and delivering him a Bank Note of fifty Pounds, ordered him to go
and change it. Partridge received this with sparkling Eyes, though when he came
to reflect farther, it raised in him some Suspicions not very advantageous to
the Honor of his Master; to these the dreadful Idea he had of the Masquerade,
the Disguise in which his Master had gone out and returned, and his having been
abroad all Night, contributed. In plain Language, the only Way he could
possibly find to account for the Possession of this Note, was by Robbery; and,
to confess the Truth, the Reader, unless he should suspect it was owing to the
Generosity of Lady Bellaston, can hardly imagine any other.

To clear therefore the Honor of Mr. Jones, and to do Justice to the
Liberality of the Lady, he had really received this Present from her, who,
though she did not give much in to the Hackney Charities of the Age, such as
building Hospitals, etc. was not, however, entirely void of that Christian
Virtue; and conceived (very righty I think) that a young Fellow of Merit,
without a Shilling in the World, was no improper Object of this Virtue.

Mr. Jones and Mr. Nightingale had been invited to dine this Day with Mrs.
Miller. At the appointed Hour therefore the two young Gentlemen, with the two
Girls, attended in the Parlour, where they waited from three till almost five
before the good Woman appeared. She had been out of Town to visit a Relation,
of whom, at her Return, she gave the following Account,

'I hope, Gentlemen, you will pardon my making you wait; I am sure if you knew
the Occasion. -- I have been to see a Cousin of mine, about six Miles off, who
now lies in. -- It should be a Warning to all Persons (says she, looking at her
Daughters) how they marry indiscreetly. There is no Happiness in this World,
without a Competency. O Nancy! how shall I describe the wretched Condition in
which I found your poor Cousin; she has scarce lain in a Week, and there was
she, this dreadful Weather, in a cold Room, without any Curtains to her Bed,
and not a Bushel of Coals in her House to supply her with Fire: Her second Son,
that sweet little Fellow, lies ill of a Quinzy in the same Bed with his Mother,
for there is no other Bed in the House. Poor little Tommy! I believe, Nancy,
you will never see your Favorite any more, for he is really very ill. The rest
of the Children are in pretty good Health; but Molly, I am afraid, will do
herself an Injury; she is but thirteen Years old, Mr. Nightingale, and yet, in
my Life, I never saw a better Nurse: She tends both her Mother and her Brother;
and what is wonderful in a Creature so young, she shows all the Cheerfulness in
the World to her Mother; and yet I saw her. -- I saw the poor Child, Mr
Nightingale, turn about, and privately wipe the Tears from her Eyes.' Here Mrs.
Miller, was prevented, by her own Tears, from going on, and there was not, I
believe, a Person present, who did not accompany her in them; at length she a
little recovered herself, and proceeded thus, 'In all this Distress the Mother
supports her Spirits in a surprising Manner. The Danger of her Son sits
heaviest upon her, and yet she endeavors as much as possible to conceal even
this Concern, on her Husband's Account. Her Grief, however, sometimes gets the
better of all her Endeavors; for she was always extravagantly fond of this
Boy, and a most sensible, sweet-tempered Creature it is. I protest never was I
more affected in my Life, than when I heard the little Wretch, who is hardly
yet seven Years old, while his Mother was wetting him with her Tears, beg her
to be comforted. -- Indeed, Mamma, cried the Child, I shall not die, God Almighty,