nothing, they are doing Mischief. I will not enlarge this quaint Saying to the
most beautiful Part of the Creation in general: but so far I may be allowed,
that when the^ Effects of female Jealousy do not appear openly i^ their proper
Colors of Rage and Fury, we may suspect that mischievous Passion to be at work
privately and attempting to undermine, what it does not attack above-ground.

This was exemplified in the Conduct of the Lady Bellaston, who under all the
Smiles which she wor^ in her Countenance, concealed much Indignation against
Sophia; and as she plainly saw that this young Lady stood between her and the
full Indulgence o^ her Desires, she resolved to get rid of her by some Means or
other; nor was it long before a very favorable Opportunity of accomplishing
this, presented itself to her.

The Reader may be pleased to remember, that when Sophia was thrown into that
Consternation at the Play house, by the Wit and Humor of a Set of young
Gentlemen, who call themselves the Town, we informed him, that she had put
herself under the Protection of a young Nobleman, who had very safely conducted
her to her Chair.

This Nobleman, who frequently visited Lady Bellaston, had more than once seen
Sophia there, sin^^ her Arrival in Town, and had conceived a very great liking
to her; which Liking, as Beauty never look^ more amiable than in Distress,
Sophia had in the Fright so increased, that he might now without any great
Impropriety be said to be actually in love with her.

It may easily be believed that he would not suffer so handsome an Occasion of
improving his Acquaintance with the beloved Object as now offered itself to
elapse, when good-breeding alone might have prompted him to pay her a Visit.

The next Morning therefore, after this Accident he waited on Sophia, with the
usual Compliments and Hopes that she had received no Harm from her last Night's
Adventure.

As Love like Fire when once thoroughly kindled, ^s soon blown into a Flame;
Sophia in a very short Time completed her Conquest. Time now flew away
unperceived, and the Noble Lord had been two Hours in Company with the Lady,
before it entered unto his Head that he had made too long a Visit. Though ^his
Circumstance alone would have alarmed Sophia, who was somewhat more a Mistress
of Computation at present; she had indeed much more pregnant Evidence from the
Eyes of her Lover of what ^ast within his Bosom; nay, though he did not make
any open Declaration of his Passion, yet many of ^is Expressions were rather
too warm, and too tender ^o have been imputed to Complaisance, even in the Age
when such Complaisance was in Fashion; the very Reverse of which is well known
to be the reign^ng Mode at present.

Lady Bellaston had been apprised of his Lordship's Visit at his first Arrival;
and the Length of it very well satisfied her that Things went as she wished,
and is indeed she had suspected the second Time she saw this young Couple
together. This Business she rightly, I think, concluded, that she should by no
means forward by mixing in the Company while they were together; she therefore
ordered her Servants that when my Lord was going, they should tell him, she
desired to speak with him, and employed the intermediate Time in meditating how
best to accomplish a Scheme which she made no doubt but his Lord hip would very
readily embrace the Execution of.

Lord Fellamar (for that was the Title of this young Nobleman) was no sooner
introduced to her Ladyship, than she attacked him in the following Strain:
'Bless me, my Lord, are you here yet? I thought my Servants had made a Mistake
and let you got away; and I wanted to see you about an Affair of some
Importance.' -- 'Indeed, Lady Bellaston,' said he, I don't wonder you are
astonished at the Length of my Visit: For I have staid above two Hours, and did
not think I had staid above half a one.' -- 'What am I to conclude from thence,
my Lord?' said she, 'The Company must be very agreeable which can make Time
slide away so very deceitfully.' -- 'Upon my Honor,' said he, 'the most
agreeable I ever saw. Pray tell me, Lady Bellaston, who is this blazing Star
which you have produced among us all of a sudden?' -- What blazing Star, my
Lord?' said she, affecting a Surprise. -- 'I mean,' said he, 'the Lady I saw
here the other Day, whom I had last Night in my Arms at the Playhouse, and to
whom I have been making that unreasonable Visit.' -- 'O my Cousin Western,'
said she, 'why that blazing Star, my Lord, is the Daughter of a Country Booby
Squire, and has been in own about a fortnight, for the first Time.' -- 'Upon
my Soul,' said he, 'I should swear she had been bred in a Court; for besides
her Beauty, I never saw any thing so genteel, so sensible, so polite.' -- 'O
brave!' cries the Lady, 'My Cousin has you, I find.' -- 'Upon my Honor,'
answered he, 'I wish she had: for I am in Love with her to Distraction.' --
'Nay, my Lord,' said she, 'it is not wishing yourself very ill neither, for she
is a very great Fortune, I assure you she is an only Child, and her Father's
Estate is a good 3000l. a Year.' 'Then I can assure you, Madam,' answered the
Lord, 'I think her the best Match in England.' 'Indeed, my Lord,' replied she,
'if you like her, I heartily wish you had her.' 'If you think so kindly of me,
Madam,' said he, 'as she is a Relation of yours, will you do me the Honor to
propose it to her Father?' 'And are you really then in earnest?' cries the
Lady, with an affected Gravity. 'I hope, Madam,' answered he, 'you have a
better Opinion of me, than to imagine I would jest with your Ladyship in an
Affair of this Kind.' 'Indeed then,' said the Lady, 'I will most readily
propose your Lordship to her Father, and I can, I believe, assure you of his
joyful Acceptance of the Proposal; but there is a Bar, which I am almost
ashamed to mention, and yet it is one you will never be able to conquer. You
have a Rival my Lord, and a Rival who, though I blush to name him, neither you
nor all the World will ever be able to conquer.' 'Upon my Word, Lady
Bellaston,' cries he, 'you have struck a damp to my Heart which has almost
deprived me of Being.' 'Fie! my Lord,' said she, 'I should rather hope I had
struck Fire into you. A Lover, and talk of Damps in your Heart! I rather
imagined you would have asked your Rivil's Name, that you might have
immediately entered the Lists with him.' 'I promise you, Madam,' answered he,
'there are very few Things I would not undertake for your charming Cousin; but
pray who is this happy Man?' -- 'Why he is,' said she, 'what I am sorry to say
most happy Men with us are, one of the lowest Fellows in the World. He is a
Beggar, a Bastard, a Foundling, a Fellow in meaner Circumstances than one of
your Lordship's Footmen.' 'And is it possible,' cried he, that a young Creature
with such Perfections, should think of bestowing herself so unworthily?' 'Alas!
my Lord,' answered she, 'consider the Country -- the Bane of all young Women is
the Country. There they learn a Set of romantic Notions of Love and I know not
what Folly, which this Town and good Company can scarce eradicate in a whole
Winter.' 'Indeed, Madam,' replied my Lord, your Cousin is of too immense a
Value to be thrown away: Such Ruin as this must be prevented.' 'Alas!' cries
she, 'my Lord, how can it be prevented?' The 'Family have already done all in
their Power; but the Girl is, I think, intoxicated, and nothing less than Ruin
will content her. And to deal more openly with you, I expect every Day to hear
she is run away with him.' 'What you tell me, Lady Bellaston,' answered his
Lordship, 'affects me most tenderly, and only raises my Compassion instead of
lessening my Adoration of your Cousin. Some Means must be found to preserve so
inestimable a Jewel. Has your Ladyship endeavored to reason with her?' Here
the Lady affected a Laugh. and cried, 'My dear Lord, sure you know us better
than to talk of reasoning a young Woman out of her Inclinations. These
inestimable Jewels are as deaf as the Jewels they wear; Time, my Lord, Time is
the only Medicine to cure their Folly; but this is a Medicine, which I am
certain she will not take; nay, I live in hourly Horrors on her Account. In
short nothing but violent Methods will do.' 'What is to be done?' cries my
Lord, 'what Methods are to be taken?' -- 'Is there any Method upon Earth?' --
'Oh! Lady Bellaston! there is nothing which I would not undertake for such a
Reward.' -- 'I really know not,' answered the Lady, after a Pause, and then
pausing again, she cried out, -- 'Upon my Soul, I am at my Wit's End on this
Girl's Account. -- If she can be preserved, something must be done immediately,
and as I say, nothing but violent Methods will do. -- If your Lordship has
really this Attachment to my Cousin, (and to do her Justice, except in this
silly Inclination, of which she will soon see her Folly, she is every way
deserving,) I think there may be one Way, indeed it is a very disagreeable one,
and what I am almost afraid to think of. -- It requires great Spirit, I promise
you.' 'I am not conscions, Madam,' said he, 'of any Defect there, nor am I, I
hope, suspected of any such. It must be an egregious Defect indeed, which could
make me backward on this Occasion.' 'Nay, my Lord,' answered she, 'I am far
from doubting you. I am much more inclined to doubt my own Courage: for I must
run a monstrous Risque. In short, I must place such a Confidence in your Honor
as a wise Woman will scarce ever place in a Man on any Consideration.' In this
Point likewise my Lord very well satisfied her; for his Reputation was
extremely clear, and common Fame did him no more than Justice, in speaking well
of him. 'Well then,' said she, my Lord, -- I -- I vow, I cannot bear the
Apprehension of it -- No, it shall not be. -- At least every other Method must
be tried. Can you get rid of your Engagements and dine here today? Your
Lordship will have an Opportunity of seeing a little more of Miss Western. -- I
promise you we have no time to lose. Here will be nobody but Lady Betty, and
Miss Eagle, and Colonel Hampsted, and Tom Edwards; they will all go soon -- and
I shall be at home to nobody. Then your Lordship may be a little more explicit.
Nay' I will contrive some Method to convince you of her Attachment to this
Fellow.' My Lord made proper Compliments, accepted the Invitation, and then
they parted to dress, it being now past three in the Morning, or to reckon by
the old Style, in the Afternoon.

CHAP. III. A further Explanation of the foregoing Design.
THOUGH the Reader may have long since concluded Lady Bellaston to be a Member
(and no inconsiderable one) of the Great World, she was in reality a very
considerable Member of the Little World; by which Appellation was distinguished
a very worthy and honorable Society which not long since flourished in this
Kingdom.

Among other good Principles upon which this Society was founded, was one very
remarkable; for as it was a Rule of an honorable Club of Heroes, who assembled
at the close of the late War, that all the Members should every Day fight once
at least; so 'twas in this, that every Member should, within the twenty four
Hours, tell at least one merry Fib, which was to be propagated by all the
Brethren and Sisterhood.

Many idle Stories were told about this Society, which from a certain Quality
may be perhaps not unjustly supposed to have come from the Society themselves.
As, that the Devil was the President, and that he sat in Person in an elbow
Chair at the upper End of the Table; but upon very strict Enquiry, I find there
is not the least Truth in any of those Tales, and that the Assembly consisted
in reality of a Set of very good sort of People, and the Fibs which they
propagated were of a harmless Kind, and tended only to produce Mirth and good
Humor.

Edwards was likewise a Member of this comical Society. To him therefore Lady
Bellaston applied as a proper Instrument for her Purpose, and furnished him
with a Fib, which he was to vent whenever the Lady gave him her Cue; and this
was not to be till the Evening when all the Company but Lord Fellamar and
himself were gone, and while they were engaged in a Rubbers at Whist.

To this Time then, which was between seven and eight in the Evening, we will
convey our Reader; when Lady Bellaston, Lord Fellamar, Miss Western, and Tom
being engaged at Whist, and in the last Game of their Rubbers, Tom received his
Cue from Lady Bellaston, which was, I protest Tom, you are grown intolerable
lately; you used to tell us all the News of the Town, and now you know no more
of the World than if you lived out of it.

Mr. Edwards then began as follows: 'The Fault is not mine, Madam; It lies in
the Dullness of the Age that does nothing worth talking Of -- O la! though now I
think on it, there has a terrible Accident befallen poor Col. Wilcox. -- Poor
Ned -- You know him my Lord, every body knows him; faith! I am very much
concerned for him.'

'What is it, pray?' says Lady Bellaston.

'Why, he has killed a Man this Morning in a Duel, that is all.'

His Lordship, who was not in the Secret, asked gravely, whom he had killed; to
which Edwards answered, 'A young Fellow we none of us know; a Somersetshire Lad
just come to town, one Jones his Name is; a near Relation of one Mr. Allworthy,
of whom your Lordship I believe has heard. I saw the Lad lie dead in a
Coffee-house. -- Upon my Soul he is one of the finest Corpses I ever saw in my
Life.'

Sophia, who just began to deal as Tom had mentioned that a Man was killed,
stopped her Hand, and listened with Attention, (for all Stories of that Kind
affected her) but no sooner had he arrived at the latter part of the Story,
than she began to deal again; and having dealt three Cards to one, and seven to
another, and ten to a third, at last dropped the rest from her Hand, and fell
back in her Chair.

The Company behaved as usually on these Occasions. The usual Disturbance
ensued, the usual Assistance was summoned, and Sophia at last, as it is usual,
returned again to Life, and was soon after, at her earnest Desire, led to her
own Apartment; where, at my Lord's Request, Lady Bellaston acquainted her with
the Truth, attempted to carry it off as a Jest of her own, and comforted her
with repeated Assurances, that neither his Lordship, nor Tom, though she had
taught him the Story, were in the true Secret of the Affair.

There was no farther Evidence necessary to convince Lord Fellamar how justly
the Case had been represented to him by Lady Bellaston; and now at her Return
into the Room, a Scheme was laid between those two noble Persons, which, though
it appeared in no very heinous Light to his Lordship, (as he faithfully
promised, and faithfully resolved too, to make the Lady all the subsequent
amends in his Power by Marriage;) yet many of our Readers, we doubt not, will
see with just Detestation.

The next Evening at seven was appointed for the fatal Purpose, when Lady
Bellaston undertook that Sophia should be alone, and his Lordship should be
introduced to her. The whole Family were to be regulated for the Purpose, most
of the Servants dispatched out of the House, and for Mrs. Honor who, to
prevent any suspicion, was to be left with her Mistress till his Lordship's
Arrival, Lady Bellaston herself was to engage her in an Apartment as distant as
possible from the Scene of the intended Mischief, and out of the Hearing of
Sophia.

Matters being thus agreed on, his Lordship took his Leave, and her Ladyship
retired to Rest, highly pleased with a Project of which she had no reason to
doubt the Success, and which promised so effectually to remove Sophia from
being any future Obstruction to her Amor with Jones, by a Means of which she
should never appear to be guilty, even if the Fact appeared to the World; but
this she made no doubt of preventing by huddling up a Marriage, to which she
thought the ravished Sophia would easily be brought to consent, and at which
all the rest of her Family would rejoice.

But Affairs were not in so quiet a Situation in the Bosom of the other
Conspirator. His Mind was tossed in all the distracting Anxiety so nobly
described by Shakespeare.

Between the Acting of a dreadful Thing,
And the first Motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantasma, or a hideous Dream:
The Genius and the mortal Instruments
Are then in Council; and the State of Man,
Like to a little Kingdom, suffers then
The Nature of an Insurrection. --
Though the Violence of his Passion had made him eagerly embrace the first Hint
of this Design, especially as it came from a Relation of the Lady, yet when
that Friend to Reflection, a Pillow, had placed the Action itself in all its
natural black Colors before his Eyes, with all the Consequences which must,
and those which might probably attend it; his Resolution began to abate, or
rather indeed to go over to the other Side; and after a long Conflict which
lasted a whole Night between Honor and Appetite, the former at length
prevailed, and he determined to wait on Lady Bellaston and to relinquish the
Design.

Lady Bellaston was in Bed, though very late in the Morning, and Sophia sitting
by her Bedside, when the Servant acquainted her that Lord Fellamar was below in
the Parlour, upon which her Ladyship desired him to stay, and that she would
see him presently; but the Servant was no sooner departed than poor Sophia
began to entreat her Cousin not to encourage the Visits of that odious Lord (so
she called him though a little unjustly) upon her Account. 'I see his Design,'
said she, 'for he made downright Love to me Yesterday Morning; but as I am
resolved never to admit it, I beg your Ladyship not to leave us alone together
any more, and to order the Servants that if he enquires for me I may be always
denied to him.'

'La! Child,' says Lady Bellaston, 'you Country Girls have nothing but
Sweet-Hearts in your Head; you fancy every Man who is civil to you is making
Love. He is one of the most gallant young Fellows about Town, and I am
convinced means no more than a little Gallantry. Make Love to you indeed! I
wish with all my Heart he would, and you must be an arrant mad Woman to refuse
him.'

'But as I shall certainly be that mad Woman,' cries Sophia, 'I hope his Visits
shall not be intruded on me.'

'O Child,' said Lady Bellaston, 'you need not be so fearful, if you resolve to
run away with that Jones, I know no Person who can hinder you.'

'Upon my Honor, Madam,' cries Sophia, 'your Ladyship injures me. I will never
run away with any Man; nor will I ever marry contrary to my Father's
Inclinations.'

'Well Miss Western,' said the Lady, 'if you are not in a Humor to see Company
this Morning, you may retire to your own Apartment; for I am not frightened at
his Lordship, and must send for him up into my Dressing Room.'

Sophia thanked her Ladyship and withdrew; and presently afterward Fellamar
was admitted up Stairs.

CHAP. IV. By which it will appear how dangerous an Advocate a Lady is, when
she applies her Eloquence to an ill Purpose.
WHEN Lady Bellaston heard the young Lord's Scruples, she treated them with the
same Disdain with which one of those Sages of the Law, called Newgate
Solicitors, treats the Qualms of Conscience in a young Witness. 'My dear Lord,'
said she, 'you certainly want a Cordial. I must send to Lady Edgely for one of
her best Drams. Fie upon it! have more Resolution. Are you frightened by the
Word Rape? Or are you apprehensive --? Well, if the Story of Helen was modern,
I should think it unnatural. I mean the Behavior of Paris, not the Fondness of
the Lady; for all Women love a Man of Spirit. There is another Story of the
Sabine Ladies, -- and that too, I thank Heaven, is very ancient. Your Lordship,
perhaps, will admire my Reading; but I think Mr. Hook tells us they made
tolerable good Wives afterward. I fancy few of my married Acquaintance were
ravished by their Husbands.' 'Nay, dear Lady Bellaston,' cried he, 'don't
ridicule me in this Manner. 'Why, my good Lord,' answered she, do you think any
Woman in England would not laugh at you in her Heart whatever Prudery she might
wear in her Countenance? -- You force me to use a strange Kind of Language, and
to betray my Sex most abominably: But I am contented with knowing my Intentions
are good, and that I am endeavoring to serve my Cousin; for I think you will
make her a Husband notwithstanding this; or, upon my Soul, I would not even
persuade her to fling herself away upon an empty Title. She should not upbraid
me hereafter with having lost a Man of Spirit? for that his Enemies allow this
poor young Fellow to be.'

Let those who have had the Satisfaction of hearing Reflections of this Kind
from a Wife or a Mistrss, declare whether they are at all sweetened by coming
from a Female Tongue. Certain it is they sunk deeper into his Lordship, than
any Thing which Demosthenes or Cicero could have said on the Occasion.

Lady Bellaston perceiving she had fired the young Lord's Pride, began now,
like a true Orator, to rouse other Passions to its Assistance. 'My Lord,' said
she, in a graver Voice, 'you will be pleased to remember you mentioned this
Matter to me first; for I would not appear to you in the Light of one who is
endeavoring to put off my Cousin upon you. Fourscore thousand Pounds do not
stand in Need of an Advocate to recommend them. Nor does Miss Western,' said
he, 'require any Recommendation from her Fortune; for in my Opinion, no Woman
ever had half her Charms.' 'Yes, yes, my Lord;' replied the Lady, looking in
the Glass, 'there have been Women with more than half her Charms, I assure you;
not that I need lessen her on that Account. She is a most delicious Girl,
that is certain; and within these few Hours she will be in the Arms of one, who
surely does not deserve her, though I will give him his due, I believe he is
truly a Man of Spirit.'

'I hope so, Madam,' said my Lord; 'though I must own he does not deserve her;
for unless Heaven, or your Ladyship disappoint me, she shall within that Time
be in mine.'

'Well spoken, my Lord,' answered the Lady. 'I promise you no Disappointment
shall happen from my Side; and within this Week I am convinced I shall call
your Lordship my Cousin in Public.'

The Remainder of this Scene consisted entirely of Raptures, Excuses, and
Compliments, very pleasant to have heard from the Parties; but rather dull when
related at second Hand. Here, therefore, we shall put an End to this Dialogue,
and hasten to the fatal Hour, when every Thing was prepared for the Destruction
of poor Sophia.

But this being the most tragical Matter in our whole History, we shall treat
it in a Chapter by itself.

CHAP. V. Containing some Matters which may affect, and others which may
surprise the Reader.
THE Clock had now struck Seven and poor Sophia, alone and melancholy, sat
reading a Tragedy. It was the Fatal Marriage, and she was now come to that Part
where the poor, distressed Isabella disposes of her Wedding-Ring.

Here the Book dropped from her Hand, and a Shower of Tears ran down into her
Bosom. In this Situation she had continued a Minute, when the Door opened, and
in came Lord Fellamar. Sophia started from her Chair at his Entrance; and his
Lordship advancing forwards, and making a low Bow said, 'I am afraid, Miss
Western, I break in upon you abruptly.' 'Indeed my Lord,' says she, 'I must own
myself a little surprised at this unexpected Visit.' 'If this Visit be
unexpected, Madam,' answered Lord Fellamar, 'my Eyes must have been very
faithless Interpreters of my Heart, when last I had the Honor of seeing you:
For surely you could not otherwise have hoped to detain my Heart in your
Possession, without receiving a Visit from its Owner.' Sophia, confused as she
was, answered this Bombast (and very properly, I think,) with a Look of
inconceivable Disdain. My Lord then made another and a longer Speech of the
same Sort. Upon which Sophia, trembling, said, 'Am I really to conceive your
Lordship to be out of your Senses? Sure, my Lord, there is no other Excuse for
such Behaviour' -- 'I am, indeed, Madam, in the Situation you suppose,' cries
his Lordship; 'and sure you will pardon the Effects of a Frenzy which you
yourself have occasioned: For Love has so totally deprived me of Reason, that
I am scarce accountable for any of my Actions.' 'Upon my Word, my Lord,' said
Sophia, I neither understand your Words nor your Behavior.' -- 'Suffer me
then, Madam,!' cries he, 'at your Feet to explain both, by laying open my Soul
to you, and declaring that I dote on you to the highest Degree of Distraction.
O most adorable, most divine Creature! what Language can express the Sentiments
of my Heart?' 'I do assure you, my Lord,' said Sophia, 'I shall not stay to
hear any more of this.' 'Do not,' cries he, 'think of leaving me thus cruelly:
could you know half the Torments which I feel, that tender Bosom must Pity what
those Eyes have caused.' Then fetching a deep Sigh, and laying hold of her
Hand, he ran on for some Minutes in a Strain which would be a little more
pleasing to the Reader, than it was to the Lady; and at last concluded with a
Declaration, 'That if he was Master of the World, he would lay it at her Feet.'
Sophia then forcibly pulling away her Hand from his, answered, with much
Spirit, 'I promise you, Sir, your World and its Master, I should spurn from me
with equal Contempt.' She then offered to go, and Lord Fellamar again laying
Hold of her Hand, said, 'Pardon me, my beloved Angel, Freedoms which nothing
but Despair could have tempted me take. -- Believe me, could I have had any
Hope that my Title and Fortune, neither of them inconsiderable, unless when
compared with your Worth, would have been accepted, I had, in the humblest
Manner, presented them to your Acceptance. -- But I cannot lose you. -- by
Heaven, I will sooner part with my Soul. -- You are, you must, you shall be
only mine.' 'My Lord,' said she, 'I entreat you to desist from a vain Pursuit;
for, upon my Honor, I will never hear you on this Subject. Let go my Hand, my
Lord, for I am resolved to go from you this Moment, nor will I ever see you
more.' 'Then, Madam,' cries his Lordship, 'I must make the best Use of this
Moment; for I cannot, nor will live without you.' -- 'What do you mean, my
Lord?' said Sophia; 'I will raise the Family.' 'I have no Fear Madam,' answered
he, 'but of losing you, and that I am resolved to prevent, the only Way which
Despair points to me.' -- He then caught her in his Arms; upon which she
screamed so loud, that she must have alarmed some one to her Assistance, had
not Lady Bellaston taken Care to remove all Ears. But a more lucky Circumstance
happened for poor Sophia; another Noise now broke forth, which almost drowned
her Cries: For now the whole House rung with Where is she? D -- n me, I Will
unkennel her this Instant. Show me her Chamber I say. Where is my Daughter, I
know she is in the House, and I Will see her if she is above Ground. Show me where
she is.' -- At which last Words the Door flew open, and in came Squire Western
with his Parson, and a set of Myrmidons at his Heels.

How miserable must have been the Condition of poor Sophia, when the enraged
Voice of her Father was welcome to her Ears? Welcome indeed it was, and did he
luckily come; for it was the only Accident upon Earth, which could have
preserved the Peace of ^er Mind from being for ever destroyed.

Sophia, notwithstanding her Fright, presently knew ^er Father's Voice; and his
Lordship notwithstanding his Passion, knew the Voice of Reason, which
peremptorily assured him, it was not now a Time for the Perpetration of his
Villainy. Hearing, therefore, the Voice approach, and hearing likewise whose it
was; (for as the Squire more than once roared forth the Word Daughter, so
Sophia, in the Midst of her Struggling, cried out upon her Father;) he thought
proper to relinquish his Prey, having only disordered her Handkerchief, and
with his rude Lips committed Violence on her lovely Neck.

If the Reader's Imagination does not assist me, I shall never be able to
describe the Situation of these two Persons when Western came into the Room.
Sophia tottered into a Chair, where she sat disordered, pale, breathless,
bursting with Indignation at Lord Fellamar; affrighted, and yet more rejoiced
at the Arrival of her Father.

His Lordship sat down near her, with the Bag of his Wig hanging over one of
his Shoulders, the rest of his Dress being somewhat disordered, and rather a
greater Proportion of Linen than is usual appearing at his Bosom. As to the
rest, he was amazed, affrighted, vexed, and ashamed.

As to Squire Western, he happened, at this Time, to be overtaken by an Enemy,
which very frequently pursues, and seldom fails to overtake most of the Country
Gentlemen in this Kingdom. He was literally speaking drunk; which Circumstance,
together with his natural Impetuosity, could produce no other Effect, than his
running immediately up to hi^ Daughter, upon whom he fell foul with his Tongue
in the most inveterate Manner; nay, he had probably committed Violence with his
Hands, had not the Parson interposed, saying, 'For Heaven's Sake, Si^
animadvert that you are in the House of a great Lady. Let me beg you to
mitigate your Wrath^ it should minister a Fullness of Satisfaction that yo^
have found your Daughter; for as to Revenge, it belongs not unto us. I
discern great Contrition in the Countenance of the young Lady. I stand assured
if you will forgive her, she will repent her of all her past Offenses, and
return unto her Duty.' The Strength of the Parson's Arms had at first ^en of
more Service than the Strength of his Rhe^ric. However, his last Words wrought
some Effect, and the Squire answered, 'I'll forgee her if she wull ha un. If
wot ha un, Sophy, I Will forgee thee all. Why do unt speak? Shat ha un? D -- n
me, shat ha un? Why do unt answer? Was ever such a stubborn Tuoad?'

'Let me entreat you, Sir, to be a little more moderate said the Parson: you
frighten the young Lady so, that you deprive her of all Power of Utterance.'

'Power of mine A --, anwered the Squire. You take her Part then, you do? A
pretty Parson, truly, to side with an undutiful Child. Yes, yes, I will gee you
a Living with a Pox. I Will gee un to the Devil sooner.'

'I humbly crave your Pardon, said the Parson, I assure your Worship, I meant
no such Matter.'

My Lady Bellaston now entered the Room, and me up to the Squire, who no sooner
saw her, than solving to follow the Instructions of his Sister, he ^^de her a
very civil Bow in the rural Manner, and ^^d her some of his best Compliments.
He then ^^mediately proceeded to his Complaints, and said, 'There, my Lady
Cousin, there stands the most undutiful Child in the World; she hankers after a
beggarly Rascal, and will not marry one of the greatest Matches in all England,
that we have provided for her.'

'Indeed, Cousin Western,' answered the Lady, I am persuaded you wrong my
Cousin. 'I am sure she has a better Understanding. I am convinced she will not
refuse what she must be sensible is so much to her Advantage.'

This was a wilful Mistake in Lady Bellaston; for she well knew whom Mr.
Western meant; though perhaps she thought he would easily be reconciled to his
Lordship's Proposals.

'Do you hear there, quoth the Squire, what he Ladyship says? All your Family
are for the Match Come, Sophy, be a good Girl, and be dutiful, an^ make your
Father happy.'

'If my Death will make you happy, Sir, answered Sophia, you will shortly be
so.'

'It's a Lie, Sophy, it is a d -- nd Lie, and yo^ know it, said the Squire.'

'Indeed, Miss Western, said Lady Bellaston, yo^ injure your Father; he has
nothing in View bu^ your Interest in this Match; and I and all you^ Friends
must acknowledge the highest Honor done to your Family in the Proposal.'

'Ay, all of us, quoth the Squire; nay, it was n^^ Proposal of mine. She knows
it was her Aunt proposed it to me first. -- Come, Sophy, once mo^^ let me beg
you to be a good Girl, and gee me you^ Consent before your Cousin.'

'Let me give him your Hand, Cousin, said the Lady. It is the Fashion
nowadays to dispen^^ with Time and long Courtships.'

'Pugh, said the Squire, what signifies Tim^ will not they have Time enough to
court afterward^ People may Court very well after they have be^ a-bed
together.'

As Lord Fellamar was very well assured, that ^ was meant by Lady Bellaston, so
never having hea^^ nor suspected a Word of Blifil, he made no doubt his being
meant by the Father. Coming up therefo^^ to the Squire he said, 'Though I have
not the Hono^^ Sir, of being personally known to you; yet as find, I have the
Happiness to have my Proposals accepted, let me intercede, Sir, in Behalf of
the young Lady, that she may not be more solicited at this Time.'

'You intercede, Sir! said the Squire, why, who the Devil are you?'

'Sir, I am Lord Fellamar, answered he, and am ^he happy Man, whom I hope you
have done the Honor of accepting for a Son-in-law.'

'You are a Son of a B --, replied the Squire, for ^ll your laced Coat. You my
Son-in-Law, and be ^ -- nd to you!'

'I shall take more from you, Sir, than from any ^lan, answered the Lord; but I
must inform you, that I am not used to hear such Language without Resentment.'

'Resent my A --, quoth the Squire. Don't think ^ am afraid of such a Fellow as
thee art? Because ^ast got a Spit there dangling at thy Side. Lay by ^our Spit
and I Will give thee enough of meddling with what does not belong to thee. --