
'It's very well, Sir, said my Lord, I shall make ^^ Disturbance before the
Ladies. I am very well ^^tisfied. Your humble Servant, Sir; Lady Bellaston,
your most obedient.'

His Lordship was no sooner gone, than Lady Bel^^n coming up to Mr. Western,
said, 'Bless me, ^r, what have you done? You know not whom ^ou have affronted;
he is a Nobleman of the first ^^nk and Fortune, and Yesterday made Proposals ^
your Daughter; and such as I am sure you must ^^cept with the highest Pleasure.'

Answer for yourself, Lady Cousin, said the Squire, ^ will have nothing to do
with any of your Lords. ^y Daughter shall have an honest Country Gen^^^man; 'I
have pitched upon one for her, -- and ^e shall have un, -- I am sorry for the
trouble she 'hath given your Ladyship with all my Heart.' Lady Bellaston made a
civil Speech upon the Word Trouble, to which the Squire answered, 'Why that is
kind, -- and I would do as much for your Ladyship. To be sure Relations should
do for one another. So I wish your Ladyship a good Night. -- Come, Madam, you
must go along with me by fair Means, or I Will have you carried down to the
Coach.'

' Sophia said she would attend him without Force; but begged to go in a Chair,
for she said she should not be able to ride any other Way.'

'Prithee, cries the Squire, wout unt persuade m^ can not ride in a Coach,
would? That Is a pretty Thing surely, No, no, I Will never let thee ou^ of my
Sight any more till art married, that I promise thee.' Sophia told him she saw
he was resolve to break her Heart.' 'O break thy Heart and b^ d -- nd, quoth
he, if a good Husband will break i^ I don't value a Brass Varden, not a
Halfpenny o^ any undutiful B -- upon Earth.' He then took violently hold of her
Hand; upon which the Parso^ once more interfered, begging him to use gentle
Methods. At that the Squire thundered out a Curse, an^ bid the Parson hold his
Tongue, saying, 'At'n't i^ Pulpit now? when art a got up there I never mi^ what
do say; but I will not be Priest-ridde^ nor taught how to behave myself by thee.
I wi^^ your Ladyship a good Night. Come along, Sophy, be a good Girl, and all
shall be well, Shat ^^ un, d -- n me, shat ha un.'

Mrs. Honor appeared below Stairs, and with low Curtesy to the Squire, offered
to attend her Mi^tress; but he pushed her away, saying, 'Hold, M^dam, hold, you
come no more near my House And will you take my Maid away from me,' sa^ Sophia?
'Yes, indeed, Madam, will I, cries t^ Squire; you need not fear being without a
Se^+ vant, I will get you another Maid, and a better Maid than this, who, I Would
lay five Pound to a Crown, is no more a Maid than my Grannum. No, no, Sophy,
she shall contrive no more Escapes I promise you.' He then, packed up his
Daughter and the Parson into the Hackney Coach, after which he ^ounted himself,
and ordered it to drive to his Lodg^ngs. In the Way thither he suffered Sophia
to be ^uiet, and entertained himself with reading a Lecture ^o the Parson on
good Manners, and a proper Beha^iour to his Betters.

It is possible he might not so easily have carried ^ff his Daughter from Lady
Bellaston, had that good Lady desired to have detained her; but in reality she
was not a little pleased with the Confinement into which Sophia was going; and
as her Project with Lord Fellamar had failed of Success, she was well ^ontented
that other violent Methods were now go^^g to be used in Favor of another Man.

CHAP. VI. ^y what Means the Squire came to discover his Daughter.
THOUGH the Reader in many Histories is obliged to digest much more
unaccountable Ap^arances than this of Mr. Western, without any Sa^^sfaction at
all; yet as we dearly love to oblige him ^henever it is in our Power, we shall
now proceed ^ show by what Method the Squire discovered where ^s Daughter was.

In the third Chapter then of the preceding Book, ^e gave a Hint (for it is not
our Custom to unfold at ^y Time more than is necessary for the Occasion) ^^at
Mrs. Fitzpatrick, who was very desirous of re^^nciling herself to her Uncle and
Aunt Western, ^ought she had a probable Opportunity by the Service ^ preserving
Sophia from committing the same Crime which had drawn on herself the Anger of
her Family. After much Deliberation therefore she resolved to inform her Aunt
Western where her Cousin was, and accordingly she writ the following Letter,
which we shall give the Reader at length for more Reasons than one.

Honored Madam,
The Occasion of my writing this will perhaps make a Letter of mine agreeable
to my dear Aunt, for the Sake of one of her Neices, though I have little Reason
to hope it will be so on the account of another.

Without more Apology, as I was coming to throw my unhappy Self at your Feet, I
met, by the strangest Accident in the World, my Cousin Sophy, whose History you
are better acquainted with than myself, though, alas! I know infinitely too
much; enough indeed to satisfy me, that unless she is immediately prevented,
she is in Danger of running into the same fatal Mischief, which, by foolishly
and ignorantly refusing your most wise and prudent Advice, I have unfortunately
brought on myself.

I short, I have seen the Man, nay, I was most part of Yesterday in his
Company, and a charming young Fellow I promise you he is. By what Accident he
came acquainted with me is too tedious to tell you now; but I have this Morning
changed my Lodging to avoid him, lest he should by my Means discover my Cousin;
for he does not yet know where she is, and it is advisable he should not till
my Uncle has secured her. -- No Time therefore is to be lost, and I need only
inform you, that she is now with Lady Bellaston, whom I have seen, and who
has, I find a Design to conceal her from her Family. You know, Madam, she is a
strange Woman; but nothing could misbecome me more, than to presume to give any
Hint to one of your great Understanding and great Knowledge of the World,
besides barely informing you of the Matter of Fact.

I hope, Madam, the Care which I have shown on this Occasion for the good of my
Family, will recommend me again to the Favor of a Lady who has always exerted
so much Zeal for the Honor and true Interest of us all; and that it may be a
Means of restoring me to your Friendship, which has made so great a Part of my
former, and is so necessary to my future Happiness. I am,

With the utmost Respect, Honored Madam, Your most dutiful obliged Neice, And
most Obedient Humble Servant, Harriet Fitzpatrick.


Mrs. Western was now at her Brother's House, where she had resided ever since
the Flight of Sophia, ^ order to administer Comfort to the poor Squire in ^is
Affliction. Of this Comfort which she doled out ^^ him in daily Portions, we
have formerly given a ^pecimen.

She was now standing with her Back to the Fire, ^ad with a Pinch of Snuff in
her Hand was dealing ^orth this daily Allowance of Comfort to the Squire while
he smoaked his Afternoon Pipe, when she received the above Letter; which she
had no sooner ^ad than she delivered it to him, saying, 'There, Sir, there is
an Account of your lost Sheep. Fortune has again restored her to you, and if
you will be governed by my Advice, it is possible you may preserve her yet.'

The Squire had no sooner read the Letter than he ^aped from his Chair, threw
his Pipe into the Fire; ^d gave a loud Huzza for Joy. He then summoned ^^
Servants, called for his Boots, and ordered the ^evalier and several other
Horses to be saddled, and ^at Parson Supple should be immediately sent for.

Having done this, he turned to his Sister, caught her in his Arms, and gave
her a close Embrace, saying, 'Zounds! you don't seem pleased, one would imagine
you was sorry I have found the Girl.'

'Brother, answered she, the deepest Politicians who see to the Bottom discover
often a very different Aspect of Affairs, from what swims on the Surface. It is
true indeed, Things do look rather less desperate than they did formerly in
Holland, when Lewis the fourteenth was at the Gates of Amsterdam; but there is
a Delicacy required in this Matter, which you will pardon me, Brother, if ^
suspect you want. There is a Decorum to he used with a Woman of Figure, such as
Lady Bellaston, Brother, which requires a Knowledge of the World superior, I am
afraid, to yours.'

'Sister, cries the Squire, I know you have no Opinion of my Parts; but I Will
show you on this Occasion who is Fool. Knowledge quotha! I have not been in the
Country so long without having some Knowledge of Warrants and the Law of the
Land. I know I may take my own wherever can find it. Show me my own Daughter,
and if don't know how to come at her, I Will suffer you to call me Fool as long
as I live. There be Justices o^ Peace in London, as well as in other Places.'

'I protest, cries she, you make me tremble forth Event of this Matter, which
if you will proceed b^ my Advice, you may bring to so good an Issue^ Do you
really imagine, Brother, that the House o^ a Woman of Figure is to be attacked
by Warran^ and brutal Justices of the Peace? I will inform yo^ how to proceed.
As soon as you arrive in Tow^ and have got yourself into a decent Dress (for
indeed, Brother, you have none at present sit to appear in) you must send your
Compliments to Lad^ Bellaston, and desire Leave to wait on her. Wh^ you are
admitted to her Presence, as you certainly will be, and have told her your
Story, and have made proper Use of my Name, (for I think you only just know one
another by Sight, though you are Relations,) I am confident she will withdraw
her Protection from my Niece, who has certainly imposed upon her. This is the
only Method. -- Justices of the Peace indeed! do you imagine any such Event can
arrive to a Woman of Figure in a civilized Nation?'

'D -- n their Figures, cries the Squire; a pretty civilized Nation truly,
where Women are above the Law. And what must I stand sending a Parcel of
Compliments to a confounded Whore, that keeps away a Daughter from her own
natural Father? I tell you, Sister, I am not so ignorant as you think me. -- I
know you would have Women above the Law, but it is all a Lie; I heard his
Lordship say at 'Size, that no one is above the Law. But this of yours is
Hannover Law, I suppose.'

'Mr. Western, said she, I think you daily improve in Ignorance. -- I protest
you are grown an errant Bear.'

'No more a Bear than yourself, Sister Western, said the Squire. -- Pox! you
may talk of your Civility an you will, I am sure you never show any to me. I am
no Bear, no, nor no Dog neither, though I know Somebody, that is something that
begins with a B --, but Pox! I will show you I have a got more good Manners
than some Folks.'

'Mr. Western, answered the Lady, you may say what you please, Je vous mesprise
de tout mon Coeur. I shall not therefore be angry. -- Besides, as my Cousin
with that odious Irish Name justly says, I have that Regard for the Honor and
true Interest of my Family, and that concern for my Niece, who is a part of it,
that I have resolved to go to Town myself upon this Occasion; for indeed,
indeed, Brother, you are not a fit Minister to be employed at a polite Court.
-- Greenland -- Greenland should always be the Scene of the Tramontane
Negotiation.'

'I thank Heaven, cries the Squire, I don't understand you, now. You are got to
your Hannoverian Linguo. However, I Will show you I scorn to be behind-hand in
Civility with you; and as you are not angry for what I have said, so I am not
angry for what you have said. Indeed I have always thought it a Folly for
Relations to quarrel; and if they do now and then give a hasty Word, why People
should give and take; for my Part I never bear Malice* and I take it very kind
of you to go up to London, for I never was there but twice in my Life, and then
I did not stay above a Fortnight at a Time; and to be sure I cannot be expected
to know much of the Streets and the Folks in that Time. I never denied that you
known'd all these Matters better than I. For me to dispute that would be all as
one, as for you to dispute the Management of a Pack of Dogs or the finding a
Hare sitting, with me. -- Which promise you, says she, I never will. -- Well,
and promise you, returned he, that I never will dispute the the other.'

Here then a League was struck (to borrow a Phras^ from the Lady) between the
contending Parties; an^ now the Parson arriving, and the Horses being ready the
Squire departed, having promised his Sister to follow her Advice, and she
prepared to follow him the next Day.

But having communicated these Matters to the Parson on the Road, they both
agreed that the prescribe Formalities might very well be dispensed with; an^
the Squire having changed his Mind, proceeded in the Manner we have already
seen.

CHAP. VII. In which various Misfortunes befall poor Jones.
AFFAIRS were in the aforesaid Situation when Mrs. Honor arrrived at Mrs.
Miller's, and called Jones out from the Company, as we have before seen, with
whom, when she found herself alone, she began as follows.

'O my dear Sir, how shall I get Spirits to tell you; you are undone, Sir, and
my poor Lady's undone, and I am undone.' 'Hath any thing happened to Sophia?'
cries Jones, staring like a Madman. 'All that is bad, cries Honor, O I shall
never get such another Lady! O that I should ever live to see this Day!' At
these Words Jones turned pale as Ashes, rembled and stammered; but Honor went
on. 'O, Mr. Jones I have lost my Lady for ever.' 'How! What! for Heaven's Sake
tell me. -- O my dear Sophia! -- 'You may well call her so, said Honor, she
was the dearest Lady to me. -- I shall never have such another Place.' -- 'D --
n your Place,' ^ries Jones, 'where is? what! what is become of my Sophia?' 'Ay,
to be sure, cries she, Servants may be d -- n'd. It signifies nothing what
becomes of them, though they are turned away, and ruined ever so much. To be sure
they are not Flesh and Blood like other People. No to be sure, it signifies
nothing what becomes of them. -- 'If you have any Pity, any Compassion, cries
Jones, I beg you will instantly tell me what has happened to Sophia?' 'To be
sure I have more Pity for you than you have for me, answered Honor; I don't d
-- n you because you have lost the sweetest Lady in the World. To be sure you
are worthy to be pitied, and I am worthy to be pitied too: For to be sure if
ever there was a good Mistress' -- 'What has happened,' cries Jones, in almost
a raving Fit -- 'What? -- What? said Honor! 'why the worst that could have
happened both for you and for me. -- Her Father is come to. Town and has
carried her away from us both.' Here Jones fell on his Knees in Thanksgiving
that it was no worse. -- 'No worse! repeated Honor, what could be worse for
either of us? He carried her off, swearing she should marry Mr. Blifil; that is
for your Comfort? and for poor me, I am turned out of Doors.' 'Indeed Mrs.
Honor, answered Jones you frightened me out of my Wits. I imagined some most
dreadfuled sudden Accident had happened to Sophia; something, compared to
which, even the seeing her married to Blifil would be a Trifle; but while there
is Life, there are Hopes, my dear Honor. Women in this Land of Liberty cannot
be married by actual brutal Force.' 'To be sure, Sir, said she, 'that's true.
There may be some Hopes for you; but alack-a-day! what Hopes are there for poor
me? And to be sure, Sir, you must be sensible I suffer all this upon your
Account. All the Quarrel the Squire has to me is for taking your Part, as I
have done, against Mr. Blifil.' 'Indeed Mrs. Honor, answered he, 'I am
sensible of my Obligations to you, and will leave nothing in my Power undone to
make you amends.' 'Alas, Sir, said she, what can make a Servant amends. for the
Loss of one Place, but the getting another altogether as good!' -- 'Do not
despair, Mrs. Honor, said Jones, 'I hope to reinstate you again in the same.'
'Alack-a-day, Sir, said she, how can I flatter myself with such Hopes, when I
know it is a Thing impossible; for the Squire is so set against me: and yet if
you should ever have my Lady, as to be sure I now hopes heartily you will; for
you are a generous good natured Gentleman, and I am sure you loves her, and to
be sure she loves you as dearly as her own Soul; it is a Matter in vain to deny
it; because as why, every Body that is in the least acquainted with my Lady,
must see it; for, poor dear Lady, she cannot dissemble; and if two People who
loves one another a'n't happy, why who should be so? Happiness don't always
depend upon what People has; besides, my Lady has enough for both. To be sure
therefore as one may say, it would be all the Pity in the World to keep two
such Loviers asunder; nay, I am convinced for my Part, you will meet together
at last; for if it is to be, there is no preventing it. If a Marriage is made
in Heaven, all the Justices of Peace upon Earth cannot break it off. To be sure
I wishes that Parson Supple had but a little more Spirit to tell the Squire of
his Wickedness in endeavoring to force his Daughter contrary to her Liking;
but then his whole Dependence is on the Squire, and so the poor Gentleman,
though he is a very religious good sort of Man, and talks of the Badness of
such Doings behind the Squire's Back, yet he dares not say his Soul is his own
to his Face. To be sure I never saw him make so bold as just now, I was afeard
the Squire would have struck him. -- I would not have your Honor be
melancholy, Sir, nor despair; Things may go better, as long as you are sure of
my Lady, and that I am certain you may be, for she never will be brought to
consent to marry any other Man. Indeed, I am terribly afeard the Squire will do
her a Mischief in his Passion: For he is a prodigious passionate Gentleman, and
I am afeard too the poor Lady will be brought to break her Heart, for she is as
tenderhearted as a Chicken; it is pity methinks, she had not a little of my
Courage. If I was in Love with a young Man, and my Father offered to lock me
up, I Would tear his Eyes out, but I Would come at him; but then there is a great
Fortune in the Case, which it is in her Father's Power either to give her, or
not; that, to be sure, may make some Difference.'

Whether Jones gave strict Attention to all the foregoing Harangue, or whether
it was for want of any Vacancy in the Discourse, I cannot determine; but he
never once attempted to answer, nor did she once stop, till Partridge came
running into the Room, and informed him that the great Lady was upon the Stairs.

Nothing could equal the Dilemma to which Jones was now reduced. Honor knew
nothing of any Acquaintance that subsisted between him and Lady Bellaston, and
she was almost the last Person in the World to whom he would have communicated
it. In this Hurry and Distress, he took (as is common enough) the worst Course,
and instead of exposing her to the Lady, which would have been of little
Consequence, he chose to expose the Lady to her; he therefore resolved to hide
Honor, whom he had but just time to convey behind the Bed, and to draw the
Curtains.

The Hurry in which Jones had been all Day engaged on Account of his poor
Landlady and her Family, the Terrors occasioned by Mrs. Honor, and the
Confusion into which he was thrown by the sudden Arrival of Lady Bellaston, had
altogether driven former Thoughts out of his Head; so that it never once
occurred to his Memory to act the Part of a sick Man; which indeed, neither the
Gayety of his Dress, nor the Freshness of his Countenance would have at all
supported.

He received her Ladyship therefore rather agreeably to her Desires than to her
Expectations, with all the good Humor he could muster in his Countenance, and
without any real or affected Appearance of the least Disorder.

Lady Bellaston no sooner entered the Room, than she squatted herself down on
the Bed: 'So, my dear Jones,' said she, you find nothing can detain me long
from you. Perhaps I ought to be angry with you, that I have neither seen nor
heard from you all Day; for I perceive your Distemper would have suffered you
to come abroad; Nay, I suppose you have not sat in your Chamber all Day dressed
up like a fine Lady to see Company after a Lying-in; but however, don't think I
intend to scold you: For I never will give you an Excuse for the cold Behavior
of a Husband, by putting on the ill Humor of a Wife.'

'Nay, Lady Bellaston,' said Jones, 'I am sure your Ladyship will not upbraid
me with neglect of Duty, when I only waited for Orders. Who, my dear Creature,
has Reason to complain? Who missed an Appointment last Night, and left an
unhappy Man to expect, and wish, and sigh, and languish?'

'Do not mention it, my dear Mr. Jones,' cries she. 'If you knew the Occasion,
you would pity me. In short, it is impossible to conceive what Women of
Condition are obliged to suffer from the Impertinence of Fools, in order to
keep up the Farce of the World. I am glad however, all your languishing and
wishing have done you no harm: for you never looked better in your Life. Upon
my Faith! Jones, you might at this Instant sit for the Picture of Adonis.'

There are certain Words of Provocation which ^^en of Honor hold can only
properly be answered ^y a Blow. Among Lovers possibly there may be ^ome
Expressions which can only be answered by a Kiss. The Compliment which Lady
Bellaston now made Jones seems to be of this Kind, especially as ^t was
attended with a Look in which the Lady con^eyed more soft Ideas than it was
possible to express with her Tongue.

Jones was certainly at this Instant in one of the most disagreeable and
distressed situations imaginable; ^or to carry on the Comparison we made use of
before, though the Provocation was given by the Lady, ^ones could not receive
Satisfaction, nor so much as ^ffer to ask it, in the Presence of a third
Person; Seconds in this kind of Duels not being according to the Law of Arms.
As this Objection did not occur to Lady Bellaston, who was ignorant of any
other Woman being there but herself, she waited some time in great Astonishment
for an Answer from Jones, who conscious of the ridiculous Figure he made, stood
at a Distance, and not daring to give the proper Answer, gave none at all.
Nothing can be imagined more comic, nor yet more tragical than this Scene would
have been, if it had lasted much longer. The Lady had already changed Color
two or three times; had got up from the Bed and sat down again, while Jones was
wishing the Ground to sink under him, or the House to fall on his Head, when an
odd Accident freed him from an Embarassment out of which neither the Eloquence
of Cicero, nor the Politics of a Machiavel could have delivered him, without
utter Disgrace.

This was no other than the Arrival of young Nightingale dead drunk; or rather
in that State of Drunkenness which deprives Men of the Use of their Reason,
without depriving them of the Use of their Limbs.

Mrs. Miller and her Daughters were in Bed, and Partridge was smoking his Pipe
by the Kitchen Fire; so that he arrived at Mr. Jones's Chamber Door without any
Interruption. This he burst open, and was entering without any Ceremony, when
Jones started from his Seat, and ran to oppose him; which he did so
effectually, that Nightingale never came far enough within the Door to see who
was sitting on the Bed.

Nightingale had in Reality mistaken Jones's Apartment for that in which
himself had lodged; he therefore strongly insisted on coming in, often swearing
that he would not be kept from his own Bed. Jones however, prevailed over him,
and delivered him in to the Hands of Partridge, whom the Noise on the Stairs
soon summoned to his Master's Assistance.

And now Jones was unwillingly obliged to return to his own Apartment, where at
the very Instant of his Entrance he heard Lady Bellaston venting an
Exclamation, though not a very loud one; and at the same time, saw her flinging
herself into a Chair in a vast Agitation, which in a Lady of a tender
Constitution would have been an Hysteric Fit.

In reality the Lady, frightened with the Struggle between the two Men, of
which she did not know what would be the Issue, as she heard Nightingale swear
many Oaths he would come to his own Bed, attempted to retire to her known Place
of Hiding, which to her great Confusion she found already occupied by another.

'Is this Usage to be borne, Mr. Jones?' cries the Lady, ' -- basest of Men! --
What Wretch is this to whom you have exposed me?' 'Wretch!' cries Honor,
bursting in a violent Rage from her Place of Concealment -- 'marry come up! --
'Wretch forsooth! -- As poor a Wretch as I am, I am honest, that is more than
some Folks who are richer can say.' Jones, instead of applying himself directly
to take off the Edge of Mrs. Honor's Resentment, as a more experienced Gallant
would have done, fell to cursing his Stars, and lamenting himself as the most
unfortunate Man in the World; and presently after, addresing himself to Lady
Bellaston, he fell to some very absurd Protestations of Innocence. By this time
the Lady having recovered the Use of her Reason, which he had as ready as any
Woman in the World, especially on such Occasions, calmly replied; 'Sir, you
need make no Apologies, I see now who the Person is; I did not at first know
Mrs. Honor; but now I do, I can suspect nothing wrong between her and you; and
I am sure she is a Woman of too good Sense to put any wrong Constructions upon
my Visits to you; I have been always her Friend, and it may be in my Power to
be much more so hereafter.'

Mrs. Honor was altogether as placable, as she was passionate. Hearing
therefore Lady Bellaston assume the soft Tone, she likewise softened here is. --
'I'm sure, Madam,' said she, 'I have been always ready to acknowledge your
Ladyship's Friendships to me; sure I never had so good a Friend as your
Ladyship -- and to be sure now I see it is your Ladyship that I spoke to, I
could almost bite my Tongue off for very mad. -- I Constructions upon your
Ladyship -- to be sure it does not become a Servant as I am to think about such
a great Lady -- I mean I was a Servant: for indeed I am no Body's Servant now,
the more miserable Wretch is me. -- I have lost the best Mistress.' -- Here
Honor thought fit to produce a Shower of Tears. -- ' 'Don't cry, Child.' says
the good Lady, 'Ways perhaps my be found to make you amends. Come to me
tomorrow Morning.' She then took up her Fan which lay on the Ground, and
without even looking at Jones, walked very majestically out of the Room; there
being a kind of Dignity in the Impudence of Women of Quality, which their
Inferiors vainly aspire to attain to in Circumstances of this Nature.

Jones followed her down Stairs, often offering her his Hand, which she
absolutely refused him, and go^ into her Chair without taking any Notice of him
as he stood bowing before her.

At his Return up Stairs, a long Dialogue past between him and Mrs. Honor,
while she was adjusting herself after the Discomposure she had undergone. The
Subject of this was his Infidelity to her young Lady; on which she enlarged
with great Bitterness but Jones at last found means to reconcile her, and not
only so, but to obtain a Promise of most inviolable Secrecy, and that she would
the next Morning endeavor to find out Sophia, and bring him a further Account
of the Proceedings of the Squire.

Thus ended this unfortunate Adventure to the Satisfaction only of Mrs. Honor;
for a Secret (as some of my Readers will perhaps acknowledge from Experience)
is often a very valuable Possession; and that not only to those who faithfully
keep it, but sometimes to such as whisper it about till it comes to ^he Ears of
every one, except the ignorant Person, who pays for the supposed concealing of
what is publicly known.

CHAP. VIII. Short and sweet.
NOTWITHSTANDING all the Obligations she had received from Jones, Mrs. Miller
could ^ot forbear in the Morning some gentle Remonstrances for the Hurricain
which had happened the preceding Night in his Chamber. These were however so
gen^le and so friendly; professing, and indeed truly, to ^im at nothing more
than the real good of Mr. Jones himself, that he far from being offended,
thankfully ^eceived the Admonition of the good Woman, ex^ressed much Concern
for what had past, excused it ^s well as he could, and promised never more to
bring he same Disturbances into the House.

But though Mrs. Miller did not refrain from a ^hort Expostulation in private
at their first meeting, ^et the Occasion of his being summoned down Stairs that
Morning was of a much more agreeable Kind; ^eing indeed to perform the Office
of a Father to Miss Nancy, and to give her in Wedlock to Mr, Nightingale, who
was now ready dressed, and full as sober ^s many of my Readers will think a Man
ought to ^e who receives a Wife in so imprudent a Man^er.

And here perhaps it may be proper to account for the Escape which this young
Gentleman had made from his Uncle, and for his Appearance in the Condition in
which we have seen him the Night before.

Now when the Uncle had arrived at his Lodgings with his Nephew, partly to
indulge his own Inclinations (for he dearly loved his Bottle) and partly to
disqualify his Nephew from the immediate Execution of his Purpose, he ordered
Wine to be set on the Table; with which he so briskly plied the young
Gentleman; that this latter, who though not much used to Drinking, did not
detest it so as to be guilty of Disobedience or of want of Complaisance by
refusing, was soon completely finished.

Just as the Uncle had obtained this Victory, and was preparing a Bed for his
Nephew, a Messenger arrived with a Piece of News, which so entirely
disconcerted and shocked him, that he in a Moment lost all Consideration for
his Nephew, and his whole Mind became entirely taken up with his own Concerns.

This sudden and afflicting News was no less than that his Daughter had taken
the Opportunity of almost the first Moment of his Absence, and had gone off
with a Neighboring young Clergyman; against whom though her Father could have
had but one Objection, namely, that he was worth nothing, yet she had never
thought proper to communicate her Amoun^ even to that Father; and so artfully
she managed, that it had never been once suspected by any, till now that it was
consummated.

Old Mr. Nightingale no sooner received this Account, than in the utmost
Confusion he ordered a Post-Chaise to be instantly got ready, and having
recommended his Nephew to the Care of a Servant, he directly left the House,
scarce knowing what he did, nor whither he went.

The Uncle being thus departed, when the Servant came to attend the Nephew to
Bed, had waked him for that Purpose, and had at last made him sensible that his
Uncle was gone, he, instead of accepting the kind Offices tendered him,
insisted on a Chair being called; with this the Servant, who had received no
strict Orders to the contrary, readily complied; and thus being conducted back
to the House of Mrs. Miller, he had staggered up to Mr. Jones's Chamber, as
has been before recounted.

This Bar of the Uncle being now removed (though young Nightingale knew not as
yet in what Manner) and all Parties being quickly ready, the Mother Mr. Jones,
Mr. Nightingale, and his Love stepped into a Hackney-Coach, which conveyed him to
Doctor's Commons; where Miss Nancy was, in vulgar Language, soon made an honest
Woman, and the poor Mother became in the purest Sense of the Word, one of the
happiest of all human Beings.

And now Mr. Jones having seen his good Offices to that poor Woman and her
Family brought to a happy Conclusion, began to apply himself to his own
Concerns; but here lest many of my Readers should censure his Folly for thus
troubling himself with the Affairs of others, and lest some few should think he
acted more disinterestedly than indeed he did, we think proper to assure our
Reader, that he was so far from being unconcerned in this Matter, that he had
^ndeed a very considerable Interest in bringing it to that final Consummation.

To explain this seeming Paradox at once, he was one who could truly say with
him in Terence, Homo sum: Nihil humani a me alienum puto. He was never an
^ndifferent Spectator of the Misery or Happiness of any one; and he felt either
the one or the other in greater Proportion as he himself contributed to either.
He could not therefore be the Instrument of raising a whole Family from the
lowest State of Wretchedness to the highest Pitch of Joy without conveying
great Felicity to himself; more perhaps than worldly Men often purchase to
themselves by undergoing the most severe Labor, and often by wading through
the deepest Iniquity.

Those Readers who are of the same Complexion with him will perhaps think this
short Chapter contains abundance of Matter; while others may probably wish,
short as it is, that it had been totally spared as impertinent to the main
Design, which I suppose they conclude is to bring Mr. Jones to the Gallows, or
if possible, to a more deplorable Catastrophe.

CHAP. IX. Containing Love Letters of several Sorts.
MR. Jones at his Return Home, found the fellowing Letters lying on his Table,
which he luckily opened in the Order they were sent.

LETTER I.
Surely I am under some strange Infatuation; I cannot keep my Resolutions a
Moment, however strongly made or justly founded. Last Night I resolved never to
see you more; this Morning I am willing to hear if you can, as you say, clear
up this Affair. And yet I know that to be impossible. I have said every Thing
to myself which you can invent. -- Perhaps not. Perhaps your Invention is
stronger Come to me therefore the Moment you receive this. If you can forge an
Excuse, I almost promise you to believe it. Betrayed to -- I will think no
more. -- Come to me directly. -- This is the third Letter I have writ, the two
former are burnt -- I am almost inclined to burn thi^ too -- I wish I preserve
my Senses. -- Come to me presently.


LETTER II.
If you ever expect to be forgiven, or even suffered within my Doors, come to
me this instant.


LETTER III.
I now find you was not at Home when my Notes came to your Lodgings. The Moment
you receive this let me see you; -- I shall not stir out; nor shall any Body be
let in but yourself. Sure nothing can detain you long.


Jones had just read over these three Billets when Mr. Nightingale came into
the Room. 'Well, Tom,' said he, 'any News from Lady Bellaston, after last
Night's Adventure?' (for it was now no Secret to any one in that House who the
Lady was.) 'The Lady Bellaston? answered Jones very gravely. -- 'Nay, dear
Tom,' cries Nightingale, 'don't be so reserved to your Friends. Though I was
too drunk to see her last Night, I saw her at the Masquerade. Do you think I am
ignorant who the Queen of the Fairies is?' 'And did you really then know the
Lady at the Masquerade?' said Jones. 'Yes, upon my Soul, did I,' said
Nightingale, 'and have given you twenty Hints of it since, though you seemed
always so tender on that Point, that I would not speak plainly. I fancy, my
Friend, by your extreme Nicety in this Matter, you are not so well acquainted
with the Character of the Lady as with her Person. Don't be angry Tom, but,
upon my Honor, you are not the first young Fellow she has debauched. Her
Reputation is in no Danger, believe me.'

Though Jones had no Reason to imagine the Lady ^o have been of the vestal Kind
when his Amor began, yet as he was thoroughly ignorant of the Town and had
very little Acquaintance in it, he had yet no Knowledge of that Character which
is vulgarly called a Demirep; that is to say, a Woman that intrigues 'with
every Man she likes, under the Name and Appearance of Virtue; and who, though
some over-nice Ladies will not be seen with her, is visited (as they term it)
by the whole Town; in short, whom every Body knows to be what no Body calls her.

When he found, therefore, that Nightingale was perfectly acquainted with his
Intrigue, and began to suspect that so scrupulous a Delicacy as he had hitherto
observed, was not quite necessary on the Occasion, he gave a Latitude to his
Friend's Tongue, and desired him to speak plainly what he knew, on had ever
heard of the Lady.

Nightingale, who in many other Instances, wa^ rather too effeminate in his
Disposition, had a pretty strong Inclination to Tittle Tattle. He had no
sooner, therefore, received a full Liberty of speaking from Jones, than he
entered upon a long Narrative concerning the Lady: which, as it contained many
Particulars highly to her Dishonor, we have to^ great a Tenderness for all
Women of Condition to repeat; we would cautiously avoid giving an Opportunity
to the future Commentators on our Works of making any malicious Application;
and of forcing us to be against our Will, the Author of Scandal which never
entered into our Head.

Jones having very attentively heard all that Nightingale had to say, fetched a
deep Sigh, which the other observing, cried, 'Heyday! Why thou a^^ not in Love