appease the Squire -- write to my mistress, am blessed with an answer -- beg
leave of her brother to dance with her at a ball; obtain his consent and here is
-- enjoy a private conversation with her -- am perplexed with reflections --
have the honor of appearing her partner at the ball -- we are complimented by
a certain nobleman -- he discovers some symptoms of passion for Narcissa -- I
am stung with jealousy -- Narcissa alarmed, retires -- I observe Melinda in the
company -- the Squire is captivated by her beauty. p. 226 CHAP. LVIII. Tortured
with jealousy, I go home and abuse Strap -- receive a message from Narcissa, in
consequence of which, I hasten to her apartment, where her endearing assurances
banish all my doubts and apprehensions -- in my retreat I discover somebody in
the dark, whom, suspecting to be a spy, I resolve to kill: but to my great
surprise, am convinced of his being no other than Strap -- Melinda slanders me
-- I become acquainted with Lord Quiverwit, who endeavors to sound me with
regard to Narcissa -- the Squire is introduced to his lordship, and grows cold
toward me -- I learn from my confidante, that this nobleman professes
honorable love to my mistress, who continues faithful to me, notwithstanding
the scandalous report she has heard to my prejudice -- I am mortified with an
assurance that her whole fortune depends upon the pleasure of her brother --
Mr. Freeman condoles me on the decline of my character, which I vindicate so
much to his satisfaction, that he undertakes to combat fame in my behalf. p.
238 CHAP. LIX. I receive an extraordinary message at the door of the Long Room,
which I however enter, and affront the Squire, who threatens to take the law of
me -- I rebuke Melinda for her malice -- she weeps with vexation -- Lord
Quiverwit is severe upon me -- I retort his sarcasm -- am received with the
utmost tenderness by Narcissa, who desires to hear the story of my life -- we
vow eternal constancy to one another -- I retire -- am waked by a messenger,
who brings a challenge from Quiverwit, whom I meet, engage, and vanquish. p.
246 CHAP. LX. I am visited by Freeman, with whom I appear in public, and am
caressed -- I am sent for by Lord Quiverwit, whose presence I quit in a passion
-- Narcissa is carried off by her brother -- I intend to pursue him, and am
dissuaded by my friend -- I engage in play, and lose all my money -- set out
for London -- try my fortune at the gaming-table, without success -- receive a
letter from Narcissa -- bilk my tailor. p. 255 CHAP. LXI. I am arrested --
carried to the Marshalsea -- find my old acquaintance beau Jackson in that jail
-- he informs me of his adventures -- Strap arrives, and with difficulty is
comforted -- Jackson introduces me to a poet -- I admire his conversation and
capacity -- am deeply affected with my misfortune -- Strap hires himself as a
journeyman-barber, p. 265 CHAP. LXII. I read Melopoyn's tragedy, and conceive a
vast opinion of his genius -- he recounts his adventures. p. 274 CHAP. LXIII.
The continuation and conclusion of Mr. Melopoyn's story. p. 286 CHAP. LXIV. I
am seized with a deep melancholy, and become a sloven -- I am relieved by my
uncle -- he prevails upon me to engage with his owners, as surgeon of the ship
which he commands -- he makes me a considerable present -- entertains Strap as
his steward -- I take my leave of my friends, and go on board -- the ship
arrives at the Downs. p. 303 CHAP. LXV. I set out for Sussex -- consult Mrs.
Sagely -- atchieve an interview with Narcissa -- return to the ship -- we get
clear of the channel -- I learn our destination -- we are chaced by a large
ship -- the company are dismayed, and encouraged by the captain's speech -- our
pursuer happens to be an English man of war -- we arrive on the coast of
Guinea, purchase 400 negroes, sail for Paraguay, get safe into the river of
Plate, and sell our cargo to great advantage. p. 313 CHAP. LXVI. I am invited
to the Villa of a Spanish Don, where we meet with an English gentleman, and
make a very interesting discovery -- we leave Buenos Airs, and arrive at
Jamaica. p. 325 CHAP. LXVII. I visit my old friend Thomson -- we set sail for
Europe, meet with an odd adventure -- arrive in England -- I ride across the
country from Portsmouth to Sussex -- converse with Mrs. Sagely, who informs me
of Narcissa's being in London -- in consequence of this intelligence, I proceed
to Canterbury -- meet with my old friend Morgan -- arrive at London -- visit
Narcissa -- introduce my father to her -- he is charmed with her good sense and
beauty -- we come to a determination of demanding her brother's consent to our
marriage. p. 337 CHAP. LXVIII. My father makes a present to Narcissa -- the
letter is dispatched to her brother -- I appear among my acquaintance --
Banter's behavior -- the Squire refuses his consent -- my uncle comes to town
-- approves of my choice -- I am married -- we meet the Squire and his lady at
the play -- our acquaintance is courted. p. 351 CHAP. LXIX. My father intends
to revisit the place of his nativity -- we propose to accompany him -- my uncle
renews his will in my favor, determines to go to sea again -- we set out for
Edinburgh -- purchase our paternal estate -- proceed to it -- halt at the town
where I was educated -- take up my bond to Crab -- the behavior of Potion and
his wife, and of my female cousins -- our reception at the estate -- Strap
marries Miss Williams, and is settled by my father to his own satisfaction -- I
am more and more happy. p. 360
THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM.
CHAP. XXXVII.
We depart for Europe -- a misunderstanding arises between the captain and
surgeon, through the scandalous aspersions of Crampley -- the captain dies --
Crampley tyrannizes over the surgeon, who falls a victim to his cruelty -- I am
also ill used -- the ship strikes -- the behavior of Crampley and the seamen
on that occasion. -- I get on shore, challenge the captain to single combat --
am treacherously knocked down, wounded and robbed.

NOW that I could return to my native country in a creditable way, I felt
excessive pleasure in finding myself out of sight of that fatal island, which
has been the grave of so many Europeans; and as I was accommodated with every
thing to render the passage agreeable, I resolved to enjoy myself as much as
the insolence of Crampley would permit. -- This insidious slanderer had found
means already to cause a misunderstanding between the surgeon and captain, who
by his age and infirmities was rendered intolerably peevish, his disposition
having also been sowred by a long course of disappointments, and had a
particular aversion to all young men, especially to surgeons, whom he
considered as unnecessary animals on board of a ship. -- In consequence of
these sentiments, he never consulted the doctor, notwithstanding his being
seized with a violent fit of the gout and gravel, but applied to a cask of
Holland-gin, which was his sovereign prescription against all distempers: But
whether he was at this time too sparing, or took an overdose of his cordial,
certain it is, he departed in the night, without any ceremony, which indeed was
a thing he always despised, and was found stiff, next morning, to the no small
satisfaction of Crampley, who succeeded to the command of the vessel. -- For
that very reason, Mr. Tomlins and I had no cause to rejoice at this event,
fearing that the tyranny of our new commander would now be as unlimited as his
power. -- The first day of his command justified our apprehension: For on
pretense that the decks were too much crowded, he ordered the surgeon's
hen-coops, with all his fowls, to be thrown overboard; and at the same time,
prohibited him and me from appearing on the quarter deck. Mr. Tomlins could not
help complaining of these injuries, and in the course of his expostulation
dropped some hasty words, of which Crampley taking hold, confined him to his
cabin, where, in a few days, for want of air, he was attacked by a fever,
which soon put an end to his life, after having made his will, by which he
bequeathed all his estate, personal and real, to his sister; and left to me his
watch and instruments, as remembrances of his friendship. -- I was penetrated
with grief on this melancholy occasion! the more because there was no body on
board, to whom I could communicate my griefs, or of whom I could receive the
least consolation or advice. -- Crampley was so far from discovering the least
remorse for his barbarity, at the news of the surgeon's death, that he insulted
his memory in the most abusive manner, and affirmed he had poisoned himself out
of pure fear, dreading to be brought to a court martial for mutiny; for which
reason, he would not suffer the service of the dead to be read over his body
before it was thrown overboard.

Nothing but a speedy deliverance could have supported me under the brutal sway
of this bashaw; who to render my life the more irksome, signified to my
mess-mates, a desire that I should be expelled from their society. -- This was
no sooner hinted, than they granted his request; and I was fain to eat in a
solitary manner by myself during the rest of the passage, which however soon
drew to a period.

We had been seven weeks at sea, when the gunner told the captain, that by his
reckoning we must be in soundings, and desired he would order the lead to be
heaved. -- Crampley swore, he did not know how to keep the ship's way, for we
were not within a hundred leagues of soundings, and therefore he would not give
himself the trouble to cast the lead. -- Accordingly, we continued our course
all that afternoon and night, without shortening sail, although the gunner
pretended to discover Scilly light; and next morning protested in form against
the captain's conduct; for which he was put in confinement. -- We discovered no
land all that day, and Crampley was still so infatuated as to neglect sounding:
But at three of clock in the morning, the ship struck, and remained fast on a
sand bank. This accident alarmed the whole crew; the boat was immediately
hoisted out, but as we could not discern which way the shore lay, we were
obliged to wait for daylight. In the mean time, the wind increased, and the
waves beat against the sloop with such violence, that we expected she would
have gone to pieces. The gunner was released and consulted: He advised the
captain to cut away the mast, in order to lighten her; this was performed
without success: The sailors seeing things in a desperate situation, according
to custom, broke up the chests belonging to the officers, dressed themselves in
their clothes, drank their liquors without ceremony; and drunkenness, tumult,
and confusion ensued. -- In the midst of this uproar, I went below to secure my
own effects; and found the carpenter's mate he wing down the purser's cabin
with his hatchet, whistling all the while, with great composure. When I asked
his intention in so doing, he replied very calmly, "I only want to taste the
purser's rum, that is all, master." -- At that instant the purser coming down,
and seeing his effects going to wreck, complained bitterly of the injustice
done to him, and asked the fellow what occasion he had for liquor, when in all
likelihood he would be in eternity in a few minutes. "All Is one for that (said
the plunderer) let us live while we can. -- Miserable wretch that thou art!
(cried the purser) what must be thy lot in the other world, if thou die in
the commission of robbery?" -- "Why, hell, I suppose, (replied the other, with
great deliberation,)" while the purser fell on his knees and begged of heaven
that we might not all perish for the sake of one Jonas. -- During this
dialogue, I clothed myself in my best apparel, girded on my hanger, stuck my
pistols loaded in my belt, disposed of all my valuable movables about my
person, and came upon deck, with a resolution of taking the first opportunity
to get on shore, which, when the day broke, appeared at the distance of three
miles ahead. -- Crampley finding his efforts to get the ship off ineffectual,
determined to consult his own safety, by going into the boat, which he had no
sooner done, than the ship's company followed so fast, that she would have sunk
along-side, had not some one wiser than the rest cut the rope and put off. --
But before this happened, I had made several attempts to get in, and was always
baulked by the captain, who was so eager in excluding me, that he did not mind
the endeavors of any other body. -- Enraged at this inhuman partiality, and
seeing the rope cut, I pulled one of my pistols from my belt, and cocking it,
swore I would shoot any man who should presume to obstruct my entrance. So
saying, I leaped with my full exertion, and got on board of the boat with the
loss of the skin of one of my shins. -- I chanced in my descent to overturn
Crampley, who no sooner got up than he struck at me several times with a
cutlass, and ordered the men to throw me overboard; but they were too anxious
about their own safety to mind what he said. -- Though the boat was very deeply
loaded, and the sea terribly high, we made shift to get upon dry land in less
than an hour after we parted from the sloop. -- As soon as I set foot on terra
firma, my indignation, which had boiled so long within me, broke out against
Crampley, whom I immediately challenged to single combat, presenting my
pistols, that he might take his choice: He took one without hesitation, and
before I could cock the other fired in my face throwing the pistol after the
shot. -- I felt myself stunned, and imagining the bullet had entered my brain,
discharged mine as quick as possible, that I might not die unrevenged; then
flying upon my antagonist, knocked out several of his fore-teeth with the
but-end of the piece; and would certainly have made an end of him with that
instrument, had he not disengaged himself, and seized his cutlass, which he had
given to his servant when he received the pistol. Seeing him armed in this
manner, I drew my hanger, and having flung my pistol at his head, closed with
him in a transport of fury, and thrust my weapon into his mouth, which it
enlarged on one side to his ear. -- Whether the smart of this wound
disconcerted him, or the unevenness of the ground made him reel, I know not,
but he staggered some paces back: I followed close, and with one stroke cut the
tendons of the back of his hand, upon which his cutlass dropped, and he remained
defenseless. -- I know not with what cruelty my rage might have inspired me, if
I had not at that instant, been felled to the ground by a blow on the back part
of my head, which deprived me of all sensation. -- When I received the use of
my understanding, I found myself alone in a desolate place, stripped of my
clothes, money, watch, buckles, and every thing but my shoes, stockings,
breeches, and shirt. -- What a discovery must this be to me, who but an hour
before, was worth sixty guineas in cash! I cursed the hour of my birth, the
parents that gave me being, the sea that did not swallow me up, the poignard of
the enemy, which could not find the way to my heart, the villainy of those who
had left me in that miserable condition, and in the exstacy of despair,
resolved to lie still where I was and perish.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
I get up, and crawl into a barn, where I am in danger of perishing through the
fear of the country people -- their inhumanity -- I am succored by a reputed
witch -- her story -- her advice -- she recommends me as a valet to a single
lady, whose character she explains.

BUT as I lay ruminating, my passion insensibly abated; I considered my
situation in quite another light from that in which it appeared to me at first,
and the result of my deliberation was to get up if I could, and crawl to the
next inhabited place for assistance. -- With some difficulty I got upon my
legs, and having examined my body, found I had received no other injury than
two large contused wounds, one on the fore and another on the hinder part of my
head; which seemed to be occasioned by the same weapon; namely, the butt-end of
a pistol. I looked toward the sea, but could discern no remains of the ship;
which made me conclude she had gone to pieces, and that those who remained in
her had perished: But, as I afterward learned, the gunner, who had more
sagacity than Crampley, observing that it was flood when we left her, and that
she would possibly float at high water, made no noise about getting on shore,
but continued on deck, in hopes of bringing her safe into some harbor, after
the commander had deserted her, for which he expected, no doubt, to be
handsomely rewarded. -- This he accordingly performed, and was promised great
things by the admiralty for saving his Majesty's ship; but I never heard he
reaped the fruits of his expectation. -- As for my own part, I directed my
course toward a small cottage I perceived, and in the road picked up a
sea-man's old jacket, which I suppose the thief who dressed himself in my
clothes, had thrown away; this was a very comfortable acquisition to me, who
was almost stiff with cold: I therefore put it on, and as my natural heat
revived, my wounds, which had left off bleeding, burst out afresh; so that
finding myself excessively exhausted, I was about to lie down in the fields,
when I discovered a barn on my left hand, within a few yards of me; thither I
made shift to stagger, and finding the door open, went in, but saw no body;
upon which I threw myself upon a truss of straw, hoping to be soon relieved by
some person or other. -- I had not lain here many minutes, when I saw a
countryman come in with a pitch-fork in his hand, which he was upon the point
of thrusting into the straw that concealed me, and in all probability would
have done my business, had I not uttered a dreadful groan, after having essayed
in vain to speak. -- This melancholy note alarmed the clown, who started back,
and discovering a body all besmeared with blood, stood trembling, with the
pitch-fork extended before him, his hair erect, his eyes staring, his nostrils
dilated, and his mouth wide open. -- At another time, I should have been much
diverted with this figure, which preserved the same attitude very near a
quarter of an hour, during which time I made many unsuccessful efforts to
implore his compassion and assistance; but my tongue failed me, and my language
was only a repetition of groans: At length an old man arrived, who seeing the
other in such a posture, cried, "Mercy upon en! the leaad's bewitched! -- why
dick, be thou besayd thyself?" -- Dick, without moving his eyes from the
object that terrified him, replied, "O vather! vather! here be either the devil
or a dead mon: I doan't know which o'en, but a groans woundily." -- The father,
whose eyesight was none of the best, pulled out his spectacles, and having
applied them to his nose, reconnoitred me over his son's shoulder: But no
sooner did he behold me, than he was seized with a fit of shaking, even more
violent than Dick's, and with a broken accent addressed me thus: "In the name
of the Vather, Zun, and Holy Ghosty, I charge you an you been Satan to begone
to the Red-Zea; but an you be a moordered mon, speak, that you may have a
christom burial." -- As I was not in a condition to satisfy him in this
particular, he repeated his conjuration to no purpose; and they continued a
good while in the agonies of fear. -- At length the father proposed, that the
son should draw nearer and take a more distinct view of the apparition; but
Dick was of opinion that his father should advance first, as being an old man
past his labor, and if he received any mischief, the loss would be the
smaller; whereas he himself might escape, and be useful in his generation. --
This prudential reason had no effect upon the senior, who still kept Dick
between me and him. -- In the mean time I endeavored to raise one hand as a
signal of distress, but had only strength sufficient to cause a rustling among
the straw, which discomposed the young peasant so much, that he sprung out at
the door, and overthrew his father in his flight. -- The old gentleman would
not spend time in getting up, but crawled backwards like a crab, with great
speed, till he had got over the threshold, mumbling exorcisms all the way. -- I
was exceedingly mortified to find myself in danger of perishing through the
ignorance and cowardice of these clowns; and felt my spirits decay apace, when
an old woman entered the barn, followed by the two fugitives, and with great
intrepidity advanced to the place where I lay, saying, "If it be the devil I
fearen not, and for a dead mon a can do us no harm." -- When she saw my
condition, she cried "Here be no devil, but in youren fool's head. -- Here be a
poor miserable wretch, bleeding to death, and if he dies, we must be at the
charge of burying him; therefore Dick, go vetch the old wheel-barrow and puten
in, and carry him to good man Hodge's backdoor, he is more eable than we to
lay out money upon poor vagrants." -- Her advice was taken, and immediately put
in execution: I was rolled to the other farmer's door, where I was tumbled out
like a heap of dung; and would certainly have fallen a prey to the hogs, if my
groans had not disturbed the family, and brought some of them out to view my
situation. -- But Hodge resembled the Jew more than the good Samaritan, and
ordered me to be carried to the house of the parson, whose business it was to
practice as well as to preach charity: observing that it was sufficient for him
to pay his quota toward the maintenance of the poor belonging to his own
parish. -- When I was set down at the vicar's gate, he fell into a mighty
passion, and threatened to excommunicate him who sent as well as those who
brought me, unless they would move me immediately to another place. -- About
this time I fainted with the fatigue I had undergone, and afterward understood
that I was bandied from door to door through a whole village, no body having
humanity enough to administer the least relief to me, until an old woman, who
was suspected of witchcraft by the neighborhood, hearing of my distress,
received me into her house, and having dressed my wounds, brought me to myself
with cordials of her own preparing. -- I was treated with great care and
tenderness by this grave matron, who, after I had recovered some strength,
desired to know the particulars of my last disaster. -- This piece of
satisfaction I could not refuse to one who had saved my life, therefore related
all my adventures without exaggeration or reserve. She seemed surprised at the
vicissitudes I had undergone, and drew a happy presage of my future life, from
my past sufferings, then launched out into the praise of adversity with so much
ardour and good sense, that I concluded she was a person who had seen better
days, and conceived a longing desire to hear her story. -- She perceived my
drift by some words I dropped, and smiling, told me, there was nothing either
entertaining or extraordinary in the course of her fortune; but however, she
would communicate it to me, in consideration of the confidence I had reposed in
her. -- "It is of little consequence (said she) to tell the names of my
parents, who are dead many years ago: let it suffice to assure you, they were
wealthy, and had no other child than me, so that I was looked upon as heiress
to a considerable estate, and tiezed with addresses on that account. Among the
number of my admirers, there was a young gentleman of no fortune, whose sole
dependence was on his promotion in the army, in which at that time he bore a
lieutenant's commission. -- I conceived an affection for this amiable officer,
which in a short time increased to a violent passion, and, without entering
into minute circumstances, married him privately. -- We had not enjoyed one
another long, in stolen interviews, when he was ordered with his regiment to
Flanders; but before he set out, it was agreed between us, that he should
declare our marriage to my father by letter, and implore his pardon for the
step we had taken without his approbation. -- This was done while I was abroad
visiting, and just as I was about to return home, I received a letter from my
father, importing, that since I had acted so undutifully and meanly, as to
marry a beggar, without his privity or consent, to the disgrace of his family,
as well as the disappointment of his hopes, he renounced me to the miserable
fate I had entailed upon myself, and charged me never to set foot within his
doors again. -- This rigid sentence was confirmed by my mother, who, in a
postscript, gave me to understand that her sentiments were exactly conformable
to those of my father, and that I might save myself the trouble of making any
applications, for her resolution was unalterable. -- Thunderstruck with my evil
fortune, I called a coach and drove to my husband's lodgings, where I found him
waiting the event of his letter. -- Though he could easily divine by my looks,
the issue of his declaration, he read with great steadiness the epistle I had
received; and with a smile full of tenderness, which I shall never forget,
embraced me, saying, I believe the good lady your mother might have spared
herself the trouble of the last part of her postscript. -- Well, my dear Betty,
you must lay aside all thoughts of a coach, 'till I can procure the command of
a regiment. -- This unconcerned behavior, while it enabled me to support my
reverse of fortune, at the same time endeared him to me the more, by convincing
me of his disinterested views in espousing me. -- I was next day boarded in
company with the wise of another officer, who had long been friend and
confident of my husband, at a village not far from London, where they parted
with us in the most melting manner, went to Flanders, and were killed in fight
of one another at the battle of the Wood. -- Why should I tire you with a
description of our unutterable sorrow at the fatal news of this event, the
remembrance of which now fills my aged eyes with tears! When our grief subsided
a little, and reflection came to our aid, we found ourselves deserted by the
whole world, and in danger of perishing for want: Whereupon we made application
for the pension, and were put upon the list. Then vowing eternal friendship,
sold our jewels and superfluous clothes, retired to this place (which is in the
county of Sussex) bought this little house, where we lived may years in a
solitary manner, indulging our mutual sorrow, 'till it pleased heaven to call
away my companion, two years ago; since which time I have lingered out an
unhappy being, in hopes of a speedy dissolution, when I promise myself the
eternal reward of all my cares. -- In the mean time, (continued she) I must
inform you of the character I bear among my neighbors. -- My conversation
being different from that of the inhabitants of the village, my recluse way of
life, my skill in curing distempers, which I acquired from books since I
settled here, and lastly, my age, have made the common people look upon me as
something preternatural, and I am actually at this hour believed to be a witch.
The person of the parish, whose acquaintance I have not been at much pains to
cultivate, taking umbrage at my supposed disrespect, has contributed not a
little toward the confirmation of this opinion, by dropping certain hints to
my prejudice, among the vulgar, who are also very much scandalized at my
entertaining this poor tabby cat with the collar about her neck, which was a
favorite of my deceased companion."

The whole behavior of this venerable person, was so primitive, innocent,
sensible, and humane, that I contracted a filial respect for her, and begged
her advice with regard to my future conduct, as soon as I was in a condition to
act for myself. -- She dissuaded me from a design I had formed of traveling to
London in hopes of retrieving my clothes and pay, by returning to my ship,
which by this time, I read in a newspaper, was safely arrived in the river
Thames: "Because (said she) you run the hazard of being treated not only as a
deserter, in quitting the sloop, but also as a mutineer in assaulting your
commanding officer, to the malice of whose revenge you will moreover be
exposed." -- She then promised to recommend me as a servant to a single lady of
her acquaintance, who lived in the neighborhood with her nephew, who was a
young fox-hunter of great fortune, where I might be very happy, provided I
could bear with the disposition and manners of my mistress, which were somewhat
whimsical and particular. -- But above all things, she counseled me to conceal
my story, the knowledge of which would effectually poison my entertainment; for
it was a maxim among most people of condition, that no gentleman in distress
ought to be admitted into a family, as a domestic, lest he become proud, lazy,
and insolent. -- I was fain to embrace this humble proposal, because my affairs
were desperate; and in a few days was hired by this lady, to serve in quality
of her footman; being represented by my hostess, as a young man, who having
been sent to sea by his relations against his inclinations, was shipwrecked and
robbed, which had increased his disgust to that way of life so much, that he
rather chose to go to service on shore than enter himself on board of any other
ship. -- Before I took possession of my new place, she gave me a sketch of my
mistress's character, that I might know better how to regulate my conduct.
"Your lady (said she) is a maiden of forty years, not so remarkable for her
beauty as her learning and taste, which is famous all over the county. --
Indeed she is a perfect female virtuosi, and so eager after the pursuit of
knowledge, that she neglects her person even to a degree of sluttishness; this
negligence, together with her contempt for the male part of the creation, gives
her nephew no great concern, as by that means, he will probably keep her
fortune, which is considerable, in the family. He therefore permits her to live
in her own way, which is something extraordinary, and gratifies her in all her
whimsical desires. -- Her apartment is at some distance from the other
inhabited parts of the house; and consists of a dining room, bedchamber and
study: She keeps a cookmaid, waiting woman, and footman of her own, and seldom
eats or converses with any of the family, but her niece, who is a very lovely
creature, and humors her aunt often to the prejudice of her own health, by
sitting up with her whole nights together; for your mistress is too much of a
philosopher to be swayed by the customs of the world, and never sleeps or eats
as other people do. -- Among other odd notions, she professes the principles of
Rosicrucius, and believes the earth, air, and sea are inhabited by invisible
beings, with whom it is possible for the human species to entertain
correspondence and intimacy, on the easy condition of living chaste. -- As she
hopes one day to be admitted into an acquaintance of this kind, she no sooner
heard of me and my cat, than she paid me a visit, with a view, as she has since
owned, to be introduced to my familiar; and was greatly mortified to find
herself disappointed in her expectation. Being by this visionary turn of mind,
abstracted as it were from the world, she cannot advert to the common
occurrences of life; and therefore is frequently so absent as to commit very
strange mistakes and extravagancies, which you will do well to rectify and
repair, as your prudence shall suggest."

CHAP. XXXIX.
My reception by that lady -- I become enamoured of Narcissa -- recount the
particulars of my last misfortune -- acquire the good opinion of my mistress --
an account of the young 'Squire -- I am made acquainted with more particulars
of Narcissa's situation -- conceive a mortal hatred against Sir Timothy -- I
examine my lady's library and performances -- her extravagant behavior.

FRAUGHT with these useful instructions, I repaired to the place of her
habitation, and was introduced by the waiting woman, to the presence of my
lady, who had not before seen me. -- She sat in her study, with one foot on the
ground, and the other upon a high stool at some distance from her seat; her
sandy locks hung down in a disorder I cannot call beautiful from her head,
which was deprived of its coif, for the benefit of scratching with one hand,
while she held the stump of a pen in the other. -- Her forehead was high and
wrinkled, her eyes large, gray and prominent; her nose long, sharp and
aquiline; her mouth of vast capacity; her visage meagre and freckled, and her
chin peeked like a shoemaker's paring-knife: Her upper-lip contained a large
quantity of plain Spanish, which by continual falling, had embroidered her neck
that was not naturally very white, and the breast of her gown, that flowed
loose about her with a negligence truly poetic, discovering linen that was very
fine and to all appearance, never washed but in Castalian streams. -- Around
her lay heaps of books, globes, quadrants, telescopes, and other learned
apparatus: Her snuff box stood at her right hand, at her left lay her
handkerchief sufficiently used, and a convenience to spit in appeared on one
side of her chair. -- Being in a reverie when we entered, the maid did not
think proper to disturb her; so that we waited some minutes unobserved, during
which time, she bit the quill several times, altered her position, made many
wry faces, and at length, with an air of triumph, repeated aloud; "Nor dare the
immortal Gods my rage oppose!"


Having committed her success to paper, she turned toward the door, and
perceiving us, cried, "What Is the matter?" -- "Here Is the young man (replied my
conductress) whom Mrs. Sagely recommended as a footman to your ladyship." On
this information, she stared in my face a considerable time, and then asked my
name, which I thought proper to conceal under that of John Brown. -- After
having surveyed me with a curious eye, she broke out into "O! ay, thou wa'st
shipwrecked I remember. -- Whether did thou come on shore on the back of a
whale or a dolphin?" To this I answered, I had swam ashore without any
assistance. -- Then she demanded to know if I had ever been at the Hellespont,
and swam from Sestos to Abydos. I replied in the negative: Upon which, she bid
the maid order a suit of new livery for me, and instruct me in the articles of
my duty; so saying, she spit in her snuffbox, and wiped her nose with her cap
which lay on the table, instead of a handkerchief. -- We returned to the
kitchen, where I was regaled by the maids, who seemed to outvie with one
another, in expressing their regard for me. -- From them I understood, that my
business consisted in cleaning knives and forks, laying the cloth, waiting at
table, carrying messages, and attending my lady when she went abroad. -- There
being a very good suit of livery in the house, which had belonged to my
predecessor deceased, I dressed myself in it, and found it fitted me exactly,
so that there was no occasion for employing a tailor on my account. -- I had
not been long equipped in this manner, when my lady's bell rung; upon which I
ran up stairs, and found her stalking about the room in her shift and
under-petticoat only, I would have immediately retired, as became me, but she
bid me come in, and air a clean shift for her; which having done with some
backwardness, she put it on before me without any ceremony, and I verily
believe was ignorant of my sex all the time, being quite absorpt in
contemplation. -- About four o'clock in the afternoon, I was ordered to lay the
cloth, and place two covers, which I understood was for my mistress and her
niece, whom I had not as yet seen. -- Though I was not very dexterous at this
operation, I performed it pretty well for a beginner, and when dinner was upon
the table, saw my mistress approach accompanied with the young lady, whose name
for the present shall be Narcissa. -- So much sweetness appeared in the
countenance and carriage of this amiable apparition, that my heart was
captivated at first sight, and while dinner lasted I gazed upon her without
intermission. -- Her age seemed to be seventeen, her stature tall, her shape
unexceptionable, her hair, that fell down upon her ivory neck in ringlets,
black as jet; her arched eyebrows of the same color; her eyes piercing, yet
tender; her lips of the consistence and hue of cherries; her complexion clear,
delicate and healthy; her aspect noble, ingen'ous and humane; and the whole so
ravishingly delightful, that it was impossible for any creature, endued with
sensibility, to see without admiring, and admire without loving her to excess!
How often did I curse the servile station, that placed me so infinitely beneath
the regard of this idol of my adoration! and how often did I bless my fate,
that enabled me to enjoy daily the sight of so much perfection! When she spoke,
I listened with pleasure; but when she spoke to me, my soul was thrilled with
an exstasy of tumultuous joy! I was even so happy as to be the subject of their
conversation: For Narcissa having observed me, said to her aunt, "I see your
new footman is come." Then addressing herself to me, asked, with ineffable
complacency, if I was the person who had been so cruelly used by robbers? When
I satisfied her in this, she expressed a desire of knowing the particulars of
my fortune both before and since my being ship wrecked: Hereupon (as Mrs.
Sagely had counseled me) I told her, that I had been bound apprentice to the
master of a ship, contrary to my inclination, which ship had foundered at sea;
-- that I and four more, who chanced to be on deck when she went down, made
shift to swim to the shore, where my companions, after having overpowered me,
stripped me to the shirt, and left me, as they imagined, dead of the wounds I
received in my own defense: Then I related the circumstances of my being found
in a barn, with the inhuman treatment I met with from the country people and
parson; which I perceived, drew tears from the charming creature's eyes! When I
had finished my recital, my mistress said, " Ma foy! le garcon est bien fait!"
To which opinion Narcissa assented, with a compliment to my understanding in
the same language, that flattered my vanity extremely.

The conversation, among other subjects, turned upon the young 'Squire, whom my
lady enquired after, under the title of the Savage; and was informed by her
niece, that he was still in bed, repairing the fatigue of last night's debauch,
and recruiting strength and spirits to undergo a foxchace tomorrow morning, in
company with Sir Timothy Thicket, 'Squire Bumper, and a great many other
gentlemen of the same stamp, whom he had invited on that occasion; so that by
daybreak, the whole house would be in an uproar. -- This was a very
disagreeable piece of news to the virtuosi, who protested she would stuff her
ears with cotton when she went to bed, and take a dose of opium to make her
sleep the more sound, that she might not be disturbed and distracted by the
clamor of the brutes.

When their dinner was over, I and my fellowservants sat down to ours in the
kitchen, where I understood that Sir Timothy Thicket was a wealthy knight in
the neighborhood, between whom and Narcissa a match had been projected by her
brother, who proposed at the same time to espouse Sir Timothy's sister; by
which means, as their fortunes were pretty equal, the young ladies would be
provided for, and their brothers be never the poorer; but that the ladies did
not concur in the scheme, each of them entertaining a hearty contempt for the
person allotted to her for a husband, by this agreement. -- This information
begat in me a mortal aversion to Sir Timothy, whom I looked upon as my rival,
and cursed in my heart for his presumption. -- Next morning by daybreak, being
awaked by the noise of the hunters and hounds, I got up to view the cavalcade,
and had a sight of my competitor, whose accomplishments (the estate excluded)
did not seem brilliant enough to give me much uneasiness with respect to
Narcissa, who, I flattered myself, was not to be won by such qualifications as
he was master of, either as to person or mind. -- My mistress, notwithstanding
her precaution, was so much disturbed by her nephew's company, that she did not
rise till five o'clock in the afternoon: So that I had an opportunity of
examining her study at leisure, to which I was strongly prompted by my
curiosity. -- Here I found a thousand scraps of her own poetry, consisting of
three, four, ten, twelve and twenty lines, on an infinity of subjects, which,
as whim inspired, she had begun, without constancy or capacity to bring to any
degree of composition: But what was very extraordinary in a female poet, there
was not the least mention made of love in any of her performances. -- I counted
fragments of five tragedies, the titles of which were, "The stern Philosopher.
-- The double Murder. -- The sacrilegious Traitor. -- The fall of Lucifer; --
And the Last Day." From whence I gathered, that her disposition was gloomy, and
her imagination delighted with objects of horror. -- Her library was composed
of the best English historians, poets, and philosophers; of all the French
critics and poets, and of a few books in Italian, chiefly poetry, at the head
of which were Tasso and Ariosto, pretty much used. -- Besides these,
translations of the classicks into French, but not one book in Greek or Latin;
a circumstance that discovered her ignorance of these languages. -- After
having taken a full view of this collection, I retired, and at the usual time
was preparing to lay the cloth, when I was told by the maid that her mistress
was still in bed, and had been so affected with the notes of the hounds in the
morning, that she actually believed herself a hare beset with the hunters; and
begged a few greens to munch for her breakfast. -- When I testified my surprise
at this unaccountable imagination, she let me know that her lady was very much
subject to whims of this nature; sometimes fancying herself an animal,
sometimes a piece of furniture, during which conceited transformations, it was
very dangerous to come near her, especially when she represented a beast; for
that lately, in the character of a cat, she had flown at her and scratched her
face in a terrible manner; -- that some months ago, she prophesied the general
conflagration was at hand, and nothing would be able to quench it, but her
water, which therefore she kept so long that her life was in danger; and she
must needs have died of the retention, had they not found an expedient to make
her evacuate by kindling a bonfire under her chamber window, and persuading her
that the house was in flames; upon which, with great deliberation, she bid them
bring all the tubs and vessels they could find, to be filled, for the
preservation of the house, into one of which she immediately discharged the
cause of her distemper. -- I was also informed, that nothing contributed so
much to the recovery of her reason, as music, which was always administered on
these occasions by Narcissa, who played perfectly well on the harpsicord, and
to whom she (the maid) was just then going to intimate her aunt's disorder. --
She was no sooner gone, than I was summoned by the bell to my lady's chamber,
where I found her sitting squat on her hams, on the floor, in the manner of
puss when she listens to the cries of her pursuers. -- When I appeared, she
started up with an alarmed look, and sprung to the other side of the room to
avoid me, whom, without doubt, she mistook for a beagle thirsting after her
life. -- Perceiving her extreme confusion, I retired, and on the staircase met
the adorable Narcissa coming up, to whom I imparted the situation of my
mistress: She said not a word, but smiling with unspeakable grace, went into
her aunt's apartment, and in a little time my ears were ravished with the
effects of her skill. -- She accompanied the instrument with a voice so sweet
and melodious, that I did not wonder at the surprising change it produced on
the spirits of my mistress, which were soon composed to peace and sober
reflection.

About seven o'clock the hunters arrived, with the skins of two foxes and one
badger, carried before them as trophies of their success; and when they were
about to sit down to dinner (or supper) Sir Timothy Thicket desired that
Narcissa would honor the table with her presence: But this, notwithstanding
her brother's threats and entreaties, she refused, on pretense of attending her
aunt, who was indisposed; so that I enjoyed the satisfaction of seeing my rival
mortified: But this disappointment made no great impression on him, who
consoled himself with the bottle, of which the whole company became so
enamoured, that after a most horrid uproar of laughing, singing, swearing,
dancing, and fighting, they were all carried to bed in a state of utter
oblivion. -- My duty being altogether detached from the 'Squire and his family,
I led a pretty easy and comfortable life, drinking daily intoxicating draughts
of love from the charms of Narcissa, which brightened on my contemplation,
every day, more and more. -- Inglorious as my station was, I became blind to my
own unworthiness, and even conceived hopes of one day enjoying this amiable
creature, whose affability greatly encouraged these presumptuous thoughts.

CHAP. XL.
She is surprised at my learning -- communicates her performances to me -- I
impart some of mine to her -- am mortified at her faint praise -- Narcissa
approves of my production -- I gain an involuntary conquest over the cook-wench
and dairymaid -- their mutual resentment and insinuations -- the jealousy of
their lovers.

DURING this season of love and tranquillity, my muse, which had lain dormant
so long, awoke, and produced several small performances on the subject of my
flame: But as it concerned me nearly to remain undiscovered in my real
character and sentiments, I was under a necessity of mortifying my desire of
praise, by confining my works to my own perusal and applause. -- In the mean
time I strove to insinuate myself into the good opinion of both ladies; and
succeeded so well, by my diligence and dutiful behavior, that in a little
time, I was at least a favorite servant; and frequently enjoyed the pleasure
of hearing myself mentioned in French and Italian, with some degree of warmth
and surprise, by the dear object of all my wishes, as a person who had so much
of the gentleman in my appearance and discourse, that she could not for her
soul treat me like a common lacquey. -- My prudence and modesty were not long
proof against these bewitching compliments. One day, while I waited at dinner,
the conversation turned upon a knotty passage of Tasso's Gierusalem, which, it
seems, had puzzled them both: After a great many unsatisfactory conjectures, my
mistress taking the book out of her pocket, turned up the place in question,
and read the sentence over and over without success; at length, despairing of
finding the author's meaning, she turned to me, saying, "Come-hither, Bruno,
let us see what fortune will do for us; I will interpret to thee what goes
before and what follows this obscure paragraph, the particular words of which I
will also explain, that thou may, by comparing one with another, guess the
sense of that which perplexes us." -- I was too vain to let slip this
opportunity of displaying my talents, therefore, without hesitation, read and
explained the whole of that which had disconcerted them, to the utter
astonishment of both. -- Narcissa's face and lovely neck were overspread with
blushes, from whence I drew a favorable omen, while her aunt, after having
stared at me a good while with a look of amazement, exclaimed, "In the name of
heaven! Who art thou?" -- I told her I had picked up a smattering of Italian,
during a voyage up the Straits. -- At this she shook her head, and observed,
that no smatterer could read as I had done. -- She then desired to know if I
understood French, to which I answering in the affirmative: She asked if I was
acquainted with the Latin and Greek; I replied, "A little." -- "Oho! (continued
she) and with philosophy and mathematics, I suppose?" -- I owned, I knew
something of each. -- Whereupon she repeated her stare and interrogation. -- I
began to repent my vanity, and in order to repair the fault I had committed,
said, it was not to be wondered at if I had a tolerable education, because
learning was so cheap in my country, that every peasant was a scholar; but I
hoped her ladyship would think my understanding no exception to my character.
-- She was pleased to answer, "No, no, God forbid." -- But during the rest of
the time they sat at table, they behaved with remarkable reserve.

This alteration gave me much uneasiness; and I passed the night without sleep,
in melancholy reflections on the vanity of young men, which prompts them to
commit so many foolish actions, contrary to their own sober judgment. -- Next
day, however, instead of profiting by this selfcondemnation, I yielded still
more to the dictates of the principle I had endeavored to chastize, and if
fortune had not befriended me more than prudence could expect, I should have
been treated with the contempt I deserved. -- After breakfast, my lady, who was
a true author, bid me follow her into the study, where she expressed herself
thus: "Since you are so learned, you cannot be void of taste; therefore I am to
desire your opinion of a small performance in poetry, which I lately composed.
-- You must know, I have planned a tragedy, the subject of which shall be the
murder of a prince before the altar, where he is busy at his devotions. --
After the deed is perpetrated, the regicide will harrangue the people, with the
bloody dagger in his hand; and I have already composed a speech, which I think
will suit the character extremely. -- Here it is." -- Then taking up a scrape
of paper, she read with violent emphasis and gesture, as follows: "Thus have I
sent the simple king to hell,
"Without or coffin, shroud, or passing bell: --
"To me, what are divine and human laws?
"I court no sanction but my own applause!
"Rapes, robb'ries, treasons yield my soul delight;
"And human carnage gratifies my sight:
"I drag the parent by the hoary hair,
"And toss the sprawling infant on my spear,
"While the fond mother's cries regale mine ear.
"I fight, I vanquish, murder friends and foes;
"Nor dare the immortal gods my rage oppose."


Though I did great violence to my understanding in praising this unnatural
rhapsody, I nevertheless extolled it as a production that of itself deserved
immortal fame; and beseeched her ladyship to bless the world with the fruits of
those uncommon talents heaven had bestowed upon her. -- She smiled with a look
of self-complacency, and encouraged by the incense I had offered, communicated
all her poetical works, which I applauded one by one, with as little candor as
I had shown at first. -- Satiated with my flattery, which I hope my situation
justified, she could not in conscience refuse me an opportunity of shining in
my turn; and therefore, after a compliment to my nice discernment and taste,
observed, that doubtless I must have produced something in that way myself,
which she desired to see. -- This was a temptation I could by no means resist.
-- I owned that while I was at college, I wrote some small detached pieces, at
the desire of a friend who was in love; and at her request, repeated the
following verses, which indeed my love for Narcissa had inspired. On Celia
playing on the harpsicord and singing.