reader must perceive how egregiously the simplicity and milky disposition of
this worthy man, had been duped and abused by a set of scoundrels, who were so
habituated to falsehood and equivocation, that I verily believe, they could not
utter one syllable of truth, though their lives depended upon their sincerity.
-- Notwithstanding all I had suffered from the knavery and selfishness of
mankind, I was amazed, and incensed at that base indifference which suffered
such uncommon merit as he possessed, to languish in obscurity, and struggle
with all the miseries of a loathsome jail; -- and should have blessed the
occasion that secluded me from such a perfidious world, had not the remembrance
of the amiable Narcissa, preserved my attachment to that society of which she
constituted a part. -- The picture of that lovely creature was the constant
companion of my solitude: How often did I contemplate the resemblance of those
enchanting features that first captivated my heart! How often did I weep over
those endearing scenes which her image recalled! and how often did I curse my
perfidious fate for having robbed me of the fair original! In vain did my
imagination flatter me with schemes of future happiness; surly reason always
interposed, and in a moment overthrew the unsubstantial fabric, by chastising
the extravagance of my hope, and representing my unhappy situation in the right
point of view: In vain did I fly for refuge to the amusements of the place, and
engage in the parties of Jackson, at cards, billiards, nine-pins, and fives; a
train of melancholy thoughts took possession of my soul, which even the
conversation of Melopoyn could not divert. -- I ordered Strap to inquire every
day at Banter's lodgings, in expectation of hearing again from my charmer; and
my disappointment considerably augmented any chagrin. -- My affectionate valet
was infected with my sorrow, and often sat with me whole hours without
speaking, uttering sigh for sigh, and shedding tear for tear. -- This
fellowship increased our distemper; he became incapable of business, and was
discarded by his master; while I seeing my money melt away, without any
certainty of deliverance, and in short, all my hopes frustrated; grew negligent
of life, lost all appetite, and degenerated into such a sloven, that during the
space of two months, I was neither washed, shifted nor shaved; so that my face
rendered meagre with abstinence, was obscured with dirt, and overshadowed with
hair, and my whole appearance squalid and even frightful; when, one day, Strap
brought me notice, that there was a man below who wanted to speak with me.
Roused at this intelligence, and in full hope of receiving a letter from the
dear object of my love, I run down stairs with the utmost precipitation, and
found, to my infinite surprise, my generous uncle Mr. Bowling! Transported at
the sight, I sprung forward to embrace him. Upon which he started aside with
great agility, drew his hanger, and put himself upon his guard, crying, "Avast,
brother, avast! sheer off -- Yo ho! you turnkey, why don't you keep a better
look out? here is one of your crazy prisoners broke from his lashings, I do
suppose." -- I could not help laughing heartily at his mistake, which I soon
rectified by my voice, which he instantly recollected, and shook me by the hand
with great affection, testifying his concern at seeing me in such a miserable
condition.

I conducted him to my apartment, where, in presence of Strap, whom I
introduced to him as one of my best friends, he let me know, that he was just
arrived from the coast of Guinea, after having made a pretty successful voyage,
in which he had acted as mate, until the ship was attacked by a French
privateer; that the captain being killed during the engagement, he had taken
the command, and was so fortunate as to sink the enemy; after which he fell in
with a merchant ship from Martinico, laden with sugar, indigo, and some silver;
and by virtue of his letter of marque, attacked, took, and brought her safe
into Kinsale in Ireland, where she was condemned as a lawful prize; by which
means, he had not only got a pretty sum of money, but also acquired the favor
of his owners, who had already conferred upon him the command of a large ship,
mounted with twenty nine-pounders, ready to sail upon a very advantageous
voyage, which he was not at liberty to discover -- And he assured me, that it
was with the greatest difficulty he had found me, in consequence of a direction
left for him at his lodgings in Wapping

I was rejoiced beyond measure, at this account of his good fortune; and, at
his desire, recounted all the adventures that had happened to me since we
parted. -- When he understood the particulars of Strap's attachment to me, he
squeezed his hand very cordially, and promised to make a man of him; and giving
me ten guineas for my present occasion, took a direction for the tailor who
arrested me, and went away, in order to discharge the debt, telling me at
parting, that he would soon fetch up all my lee-way with a wet sail.

I was utterly confounded at this sudden transition, which affected me more
than any reverse I had formerly felt; and a crowd of incoherent ideas rushed so
impetuously upon my imagination, that my reason could neither separate nor
connect them; when Strap, whose joy had manifested itself in a thousand
fooleries, came into my room with his shaving utensils, and without any
previous intimation, began to lather my beard, whistling with great emotion all
the while. -- I started from my reverie, and being too well acquainted with
Strap, to trust myself in his hands while he was under such agitation, desired
to be excused, sent for another barber, and suffered myself to be trimmed. --
Having performed the ceremony of ablution, I shifted, and dressing in my gayest
apparel, waited for the return of my uncle, who was agreeably surprised at my
sudden transformation.

This beneficent kinsman had satisfied my creditor, and obtained an order for
my discharge, so that I was no longer a prisoner; but as I had some reluctance
to part with my friends and fellows in distress, I prevailed upon Mr. Bowling
to favor us with his company, and invited Mr. Melopoyn and Jackson to spend
the evening at my apartment, where I regaled them with a supper, good wine, and
the news of my release, on which they heartily congratulated me,
notwithstanding the loss of my company, which, they were pleased to say, they
would severely feel. -- As for Jackson, his misfortune made so little
impression on himself, and he was altogether so loose, indifferent and
indiscreet, that I could scarce pity his situation: But I had conceived a
veneration and friendship for the poet, who was in all respects, an object much
more worthy of compassion and regard. -- When our guests withdrew, and my uncle
had retired, with an intention to visit me next morning I made up a bundle of
some linen, and other necessaries, and biding Strap carry them to Mr.
Melopoyn's lodging, went thither myself, and pressed it upon his acceptance
with five guineas, which with much difficulty he received, assuring me at the
same time, that he should never have it in his power to make satisfaction. I
then asked if I could serve him any other way, to which he answered, "You have
already done too much," and unable to contain the emotions of his soul any
longer; burst into tears, and wept aloud. -- Moved at the spectacle, I left him
to his repose, and when my uncle returned in the morning, represented his
character in such a favorable light, that the honest seaman was affected with
his distress, and determined to follow my example, in presenting him with five
pieces more: Upon which, that I might save him some confusion, I advised Mr.
Bowling to enclose it in a letter to be delivered by Strap, after we should be
gone.

This was accordingly done. I took a formal leave of all my acquaintance in the
jail, and just as I was about to step into a hackney-coach at the gate, Jackson
calling me, I returned, and he asked me in a whisper, if I could lend him a
shilling! His demand being so moderate, and in all likelihood, the last he
would make upon me, I slipped a guinea into his hand, which he no sooner
perceived, than he cried, "O Jesus! a guinea!" then laying hold of a button of
my coat, he broke out into an immoderate fit of laughter; and when his
convulsion was ended, told me, I was an honest fellow, and let me go. -- The
coachman was ordered to drive to Mr. Bowling's lodgings, where, when we
arrived, he entered into a serious discourse with me, on the subject of my
situation, and proposed that I should sail with him in quality of his Surgeon;
in which case, he would put me on a method of getting a fortune in a few years,
by my own industry; and assured me, that I might expect to inherit all that he
should die possessed of, provided I should survive him. -- Though I was
penetrated with a sense of his generosity, I was startled at a proposal that
offered violence to my love, and signified my sentiments on that head, which he
did not seem to relish; but observed that love was the fruit of idleness, that
when once I should be employed in business, and my mind engaged in making
money, I would be no more troubled with these silly notions, which none but
your fair-weather Jacks, who have nothing but their pleasure to mind, ought to
entertain. -- I was piqued at this insinuation, which I looked upon as a
reproach, and without giving myself time to deliberate, accepted his offer. --
He was overjoyed at my compliance, carried me immediately to his chief owner,
with whom a bargain was struck, so that I could not retract with honor, should
I be never so much disposed thereto. -- That I might not have time to cool, he
bid me draw out a list of medicines for a compliment of five hundred men,
adapted to the distempers of hot climates, and sufficient for a voyage of
eighteen months; and carry it to a certain wholesale apothecary, who would also
provide me in two well-qualified mates. -- While I was thus employed, Strap
came in, and looked very blank, when he understood my resolution: However,
after a pause of some minutes, he insisted upon going along with me; and at my
desire was made ship's steward by captain Bowling, who promised to be at the
expense of fitting him out, and to lend him two hundred pounds to purchase an
adventure.

When I had delivered my list of medicines, chosen a couple of my own
countrymen for mates, and bespoke a set of chirurgical instruments, my uncle
told me, that by his last voyage, he had cleared almost three thousand pounds,
one thousand of which he would immediately make over and put into my hands;
that he would procure for me credit to the value of as much more, in such goods
as would turn to best account in the country to which we were bound; and that
although he looked upon my interest as his own, he would keep the remaining
part of his fortune in his own disposal, with a view of preserving his
independance, and the power of punishing me, in case I should not make a good
use of what he had already bestowed upon me.

Without troubling the reader with an account of the effect which this
surprising generosity had upon my mind, I shall only say, that his promises
were instantly performed, and an invoyce of merchandise proper for the voyage
presented to me, that I might purchase the goods, and ship them with all
expedition. -- In the midst of this hurry the remembrance of my charming
Narcissa often interposed, and made me the most miserable of all mortals. I was
distracted with the thought of being torn from her, perhaps, for ever; and
though the hope of seeing her again, might have supported me under the torments
of separation, I could not reflect upon the anguish she must feel at parting
with me, and the incessant sorrows to which her tender bosom would be exposed
daring my absence, without being pierced with the deepest affliction! As an
imagination was daily and nightly upon the rack to invent some method of
mitigating this cruel stroke, or at least of acquitting my love and honor in
the opinion of that gentle creature, I at length stumbled upon an expedient,
with which the reader will be made acquainted in due time; and in consequence
of my determination, became less uneasy and disturbed.

My business being finished, and the ship ready to sail, I resolved to make my
last appearance among my acquaintance at the other end of the town, where I had
not been seen since my imprisonment; and as I had, by the advice of my uncle,
taken off some very rich clothes for sale, I put on the gayest suit in my
possession, and went in a chair to the coffee-house I used to frequent, where I
found my friend Banter so confounded at the magnificence of my dress, that when
I made up to him, he gazed at me with a look of astonishment, without being
able, for some minutes, to open his lips; -- then pulling me aside by the
sleeve, and fixing his eyes on mine, accosted me in this manner: "Random, where
the devil have you been! eh? -- What is the meaning of all this finery? -- Oho!
I understand you -- You are just arrived from the country! what! the roads are
good, eh! -- well, Random, you are a bold fellow, and a lucky fellow! -- but
take care, the pitcher goes often to the well, but is broke at last." So
saying, he pointed to his collar; by which gesture, and the broken hints he had
ejaculated, I found he suspected me of having robbed on the highway; and I
laughed very heartily at his supposition. -- Without explaining myself any
farther, I told him he was mistaken in his conjecture; that I had been for some
time past with the relation of whom he had frequently heard me speak; and that
being to set out next day upon my travels, I had come thither to take my leave
of my friends, and to receive of him the money he had borrowed from me, which,
now that I was going abroad, I should have occasion for -- He was a little
disconcerted at this demand; but recollecting himself in a moment, swore, in an
affected passion, that I had used him extremely ill, and he would never forgive
me, for having, by this short warning, put it out of his power to free himself
of an obligation he could no longer bear. -- I could not help smiling at this
pretended delicacy, which I commended highly, telling him, he needed not be
uneasy on that score, for I would give him a cirection to a merchant in the
city, with whom I would leave a discharge for the sum, to be delivered upon
payment. -- He professed much joy at this expedient, and with great eagerness
asked the person's name and place of abode, which he forthwith wrote in his
pocketbook, assuring me, that he would not be long in my debt. -- This affair,
which I knew he would never after think of, being settled to his satisfaction,
I sent cards to all my friends, desiring the savor of their company at a
tavern in the evening, when they honored my invitation, and I had the pleasure
of treating them in a very elegant manner, at which they expressed as much
admiration as applause. Having enjoyed ourselves till midnight, I took my leave
of them all, being well-nigh stifled with caresses; and next day I set out with
Strap in a post-chaise for Gravesend, where we went on board, and the wind
serving, weighed anchor in less than twelve hours. -- Without meeting with any
accident, we got as far as the Downs, where we were obliged to come to an
anchor, and wait for an easterly wind to carry us out of the Channel.

CHAP. LXV.
I set out for Sussex -- consult Mrs. Sagely -- atchieve an interview with
Narcissa -- return to the ship -- we get clear of the Channel -- I learn our
destination -- we are chaced by a large ship -- the company are dismayed, and
encouraged by the captain's speech -- our pursuer happens to be an English man
of war -- we arrive on the coast of Guinea, purchase 400 negroes, sail for
Paraguay, get safe into the river of Plate, and sell our cargo to great
advantage.

IT was now I put in execution the scheme I had projected at London; and asking
leave of the captain, for Strap and me to stay on shore till the wind should
become favorable, my request was granted, because he had orders to remain in
the Downs until he should receive some dispatches from London, which he did not
expect in less than a week. -- Having imparted my resolution to my trusty
valet, who (though he endeavored to dissuade me from such a rash undertaking)
would not quit me in the enterprise, I hired horses, and set out immediately
for that part of Sussex where my charmer was confined, which was not above
thirty miles distant from Deal where we mounted. -- As I was perfectly well
acquainted with the extent of the Squire's estate and influence, I halted
within five miles of his house, where we remained 'till the twilight, at which
time we set forward, and, by the favor of a dark night, gained a copse about
half a mile from the village where Mrs. Sagely lived. -- Here we left our
horses tied to a tree, and went directly to the house of my old benefactress,
Strap trembling all the way, and venting ejaculatory petitions to heaven for
our safety. Her habitation being quite solitary, we arrived at the door without
being observed, when I ordered my companion to enter by himself, and in case
there should be company with her, deliver a letter which I had wrote for the
purpose, and say that a friend of hers in London, understanding that he
intended to travel this road, had committed it to his care. -- He rapped at the
door, to which the good old matron coming, told him, that being a lone woman,
he must excuse her, if she did not open it, until he had declared his name and
business. -- He answered, that his name was unknown to her, and that his
business was to deliver a letter, which (to free her from all manner of
apprehension) he would convey to her through the space between the door and
threshold. -- This he instantly performed; and she no sooner read the contents,
which specified my being present, than she cried, "If the person who wrote this
letter be at hand, let him speak, that I may be assured by his voice whether or
not I may safely admit him." -- I forthwith applied my mouth to the keyhole,
and pronounced, "Dear mother, you need not be afraid, it is I, so much indebted
to your goodness, who now crave admittance." -- She knew my voice, and opening
the door immediately, received me with a truly maternal affection, manifesting
by the tears she let fall, her concern lest I should be discovered, for she had
been informed of every thing that had happened between Narcissa and me, from
the dear captive's own mouth. -- When I explained the motive of my journey,
which was no other than a desire of seeing the object of my love before I
should quit the kingdom, that I might in person convince her of the necessity I
was under to leave her, reconcile her to that event, by describing the
advantages that in all probability would attend it, repeat my vows of eternal
constancy, and enjoy the melancholy pleasure of a tender embrace at parting --
I say, when I had thus signified my intention, Mrs. Sagely told me, that
Narcissa, upon her return from the Bath, had been so strictly watched, that no
body, but one or two of the servants devoted to her brother, was admitted to
her presence; that afterward she had been a little enlarged, and was permitted
to see company; during which indulgence, she had been several times at her
cottage: but of late she had been betrayed by one of the servants, who
discovered to the squire, that he had once carried a letter from her to the
post house directed to me; upon which information, she was now more confined
than ever, and that I could have no chance of seeing her, unless I would run
the risque of getting into the garden, where she and her maid were every day
allowed to take the air, and lie hid until I should have an opportunity of
speaking to them -- an adventure which would be attended with such danger, that
no man in his right wits would attempt it. -- This enterprise, hazardous as it
was, I resolved to perform, in spite of all the arguments of Mrs. Sagely, who
reasoned, chid, and entreated by turns; and the tears and prayers of Strap, who
conjured me on his knees, to have more regard to myself as well as to him, than
to tempt my own destruction in such a precipitate manner. But I was deaf to
every thing, but the suggestions of my love; and ordering him to return
immediately with the horses to the inn from whence we set out, and wait for my
coming in that place, he at first peremptorily refused to leave me, until I
persuaded him, that if our horses should remain where they were 'till
daylight, they would certainly be discovered, and the whole county alarmed. On
this consideration, he took his leave in a sorrowful plight, kissed my hand,
and weeping, cried, "God knows if ever I shall see you again." -- My kind
landlady finding me obstinate, gave me her best advice how to behave in the
execution of my project; and after having persuaded me to take a little
refreshment, accommodated me with a bed, and left me to my repose. -- Early in
the morning, I got up, and armed with a couple of loaded pistols and a hanger,
went to the back of the Squire's garden, climbed over the wall, and, according
to Mrs. Sagely's direction, concealed myself in a thicket, hard by an alcove
which terminated a walk at a good distance from the house, which (I was told)
my mistress chiefly frequented. -- Here I absconded from five a-clock in the
morning to six in the evening, without seeing a human creature; at last I
perceived two women approaching, whom by my throbbing heart I soon recognized
to be the adorable Narcissa and Miss Williams. I felt the strongest agitation
of soul at the sight; and guessing that they would repose themselves in the
alcove, I stepped into it unperceived, and laid upon the stone-table a picture of
myself in miniature, for which I had sat in London, purposing to leave it with
Narcissa before I should go abroad. I exposed it in this manner, as an
introduction to my own appearance, which, without some previous intimation, I
was afraid might have an unlucky effect upon the delicate nerves of my fair
enslaver; and then withdrew into the thicket, where I could hear their
discourse, and suit myself to the circumstances of the occasion. -- As they
advanced, I observed an air of melancholy in the countenance of Narcissa,
blended with such unspeakable sweetness, that I could scarce refrain from
flying into her arms, and kissing away the pearly drop that stood collected in
each bewitching eye. According to my expectation, she entered the alcove, and
perceiving something on the table, took it up. No sooner did she cast her eye
upon the features, than she startled, crying, "Gracious God!" and the roses
instantly vanished from her cheeks. -- Her confidante, alarmed at this
exclamation, looked at the picture, and, struck with the resemblance, cried, "O
Jesus! the very features of Mr. Random!" Narcissa having recollected herself a
little, said, "Whatever angel brought it hither as a comfort to me in my
affliction, I am thankful for the benefit, and will preserve it as the dearest
object of my care." So saying, she kissed it with surprising ardour, shed a
flood of tears, and then deposited the lifeless image in her lovely bosom.
Transported at these symptoms of her unaltered affection, I was about to throw
myself at her feet, when Miss Williams, whose reflection was less engaged than
that of her mistress, observed, that the picture could not transport itself
hither, and that she could not help thinking I was not far off. -- The gentle
Narcissa starting at this conjecture, answered, "Heaven forbid! for although
nothing in the universe could yield me satisfaction equal to that of his
presence for one poor moment, in a proper place, I would rather forfeit his
company -- almost for ever, than see him here, where his life would be exposed
to so much danger." -- I could no longer restrain the impulse of my passion,
but breaking from my concealment, stood before her, when she uttered a fearful
shriek, and fainted in the arms of her companion. I flew toward the treasure
of my soul, clasped her in my embrace, and with the warmth of my kisses,
brought her again to life. O! that I were endowed with the expression of a
Raphael, the graces of a Guido, the magic touches of a Titian, that I might
represent the fond concern, the chastened rapture, and ingenuous blush that
mingled on her beauteous face, when she opened her eyes upon me, and
pronounced, "O heavens! is it you!"

I am afraid I have already encroached upon the reader's patience, with the
particulars of this amor, on which (I own) I cannot help being impertinently
circumstantial. I shall therefore omit the less material passages of this
interview, during which I convinced her reason, though I could not appease the
sad presages of her love, with regard to the long voyage, and dangers I must
undergo. -- When we had spent an hour (which was all she could spare from the
barbarity of her brother's vigilance) in lamenting over our hard fate, and in
repeating our reciprocal vows, Miss Williams reminded us of the necessity there
was for our immediate parting; and sure, lovers never parted with such sorrow
and reluctance as we. But because my words are incapable of doing justice to
this affecting circumstance, I am obliged to draw a veil over it, and observe,
that I returned in the dark to the house of Mrs. Sagely, who was overjoyed to
hear of my success, and opposed the tumults of my grief with such strength of
reason, that my mind regained in some measure its tranquillity; and that very
night, after having forced upon this good gentlewoman a purse of twenty
guineas, as a token of my gratitude and esteem, I took my leave of her, set out
on foot for the inn, where my arrival freed honest Strap from the horrors of
unutterable dread.

We took horse immediately, and alighted early next morning at Deal, where I
found my uncle in great concern on account of my absence, because he had
received his dispatches, and must have weighed with the first fair wind,
whether I had been on board or not. -- Next day, a brisk easterly gale
springing up, we set sail, and in eight and forty hours got clear of the
Channel.

When we were about 200 leagues from the Land's end, the captain taking me
apart into the cabin, told me, that, now he was permitted by his instructions,
he would disclose the intent and destination of our voyage: "The ship, said he,
which has been fitted out at a great expense, is bound for the coast of Guinea,
where we shall exchange part of our cargo for slaves and gold dust; from thence
we will transport our negroes to Buenos Airs in New-Spain, where (by virtue of
passports obtained from our own court, and that of Madrid) we will dispose of
them and the goods that remain on board for silver, by means of our supercargo,
who is perfectly well acquainted with the coast, the lingo and inhabitants." --
Being thus let into the secret of our expedition, I borrowed of the supercargo
a Spanish grammar, dictionary, and some other books of the same language, which
I studied with such application, that before we arrived in New-Spain, I could
maintain a conversation with him in that tongue. -- Being arrived in the warm
latitudes, I ordered (with the captain's consent) the whole ship's company to
be blooded and purged, myself undergoing the same evacuation, in order to
prevent those dangerous fevers to which northern constitutions are subject in
hot climates; and I have reason to believe that this precaution was not
unserviceable, for we lost but one sailor during our whole passage to the coast.

One day, when we had been about five weeks at sea, we descried to windward a
large ship bearing down upon us with all the sail she could carry. Upon which,
my uncle ordered the studding-sails to be hoisted, and the ship to be cleared
for engaging; but finding, that (to use the seamen's phrase) we were very much
wronged by the ship which had us in chase, and which by this time had hoisted
French colors, he commanded the studding-sails to be taken in, the courses to
be clewed up, the main-top-sail to be backed, the tompions to be taken out of
the guns, and every man to repair to his quarters. While every body was busied
in the performance of these orders, Strap came upon the quarter deck,
trembling, and and looking aghast, and, with a voice half suppressed by fear,
asked if I thought we were a match for the vessel in pursuit of us. Observing
his consternation, I said, "What! are you afraid, Strap?" "Afraid! (he replied)
n-n-no, what should I be afraid of? I thank God I have a clear conscience; --
but I believe it will be a bloody battle, and I wish you may not have occasion
for another hand to assist you in the cockpit." -- I immediately perceived his
drift, and making the captain acquainted with his situation, desired he might
be stationed below with me and my mates. My uncle, incensed at his
pusilanimity, bid me send him down instantly, that his fear might not insect
the ship's company; whereupon I told the poor steward, that I had begged him
for an assistant, and desired him to go down and help my mates to get ready the
instruments and dressings. -- Notwithstanding the satisfaction he must have
felt at these tidings, he affected a shyness of quitting the upper deck; and
said, he hoped I did not imagine he was afraid to do his duty above board, for
he believed himself as well prepared for death as any man in the ship, no
disparagement to me or the captain. -- I was disgusted at this affectation, and
in order to punish his hypocrisy, assured him, he might either go down to the
cockpit, or stay upon deck during the engagement. Alarmed at this indifference,
he replied, "Well, to oblige you, I Will go down, but remember it is more for
your sake than my own." So saying, he disappeared in a twinkling, without
waiting for an answer. -- By this time we could observe two tire of guns in the
ship which pursued us, and which was now but two short miles astern. This
discovery had an evident effect upon the sailors, who did not scruple to say,
that we should be tore to pieces, and blown out of the water, and that if in
case any of them should lose their precious limbs, they must go abegging for
life, for there was no provision made by the merchants for those poor souls who
are maimed in their service. The captain understanding this backwardness,
ordered the crew abaft, and spoke to them thus; "My lads, I am told you hang an
a -- se. -- I have gone to sea thirty years, man and boy, and never saw English
sailors afraid before. -- Mayhap you think I want to expose you for the lucre
of gain. -- Whosoever thinks so, thinks a damned lie, for my whole cargo is
insured; so that in case I should be taken, my loss will not be great. -- The
enemy is stronger than we to be sure. -- What then? have we not a chance for
carrying away one of her masts, and so get clear of her? -- If we find her too
hard for us, it is but striking at last. -- If any man is hurt in the
engagement, I promise on the word of an honest seaman, to make them a
recompense according to his loss. -- So now, you that are lazy, lubberly,
cowardly dogs, get away, and sculk in the hold, and bread-room; and you that
are jolly boys, stand by me, and let us give one broadside for the honor of
old England." This eloquent harangue was so well adapted to the disposition of
his hearers, that one and all of them, pulling off their hats, waved them over
their heads, and saluted him with three chears; upon which he sent his boy for
two large case-bottles of brandy, and having treated every man with a dram,
they repaired to their quarters, and waited impatiently for the word of
command. -- I must do my uncle the justice to say, that in the whole of his
disposition, he behaved with the utmost intrepidity, conduct and deliberation.
-- The enemy being very near, he ordered me to my station, and was just going
to give the word for hoisting the colors, and firing, when the supposed
Frenchman, hauled down his white pennant jack and ensign, hoisted English ones,
and fired a gun ahead of us: This was a joyful event to captain Bowling, who
immediately showed his colors, and fired a gun to leeward: Upon which the
other ship run alongside of him, hailed him, and giving him to know that she
was an English man of war of forty guns, ordered him to hoist out his boat and
come on board. -- This he performed with the more alacrity, because upon
enquiry, he found that she was commanded by an old mess-mate of his, who was
overjoyed to see him, detained him to dinner, and sent his barge for the
supercargo and me, who were very much caressed on his account. -- As this
commander was destined to cruise upon the French, in the latitude of Martinico,
his stem and quarters were adorned with white flowers de lis, and the whole
shell of the ship so much disguised, for a decoy to the enemy, that it was no
wonder my uncle did not know her, although he had sailed on board of her many
years. -- We kept company with her four days, during which time the captains
were never asunder, and then parted, our course lying different from hers.

In less than a fortnight after, we made the land of Guinea, near the mouth of
the river Gambia, and trading along the coast as far to the southward of the
Line as Angola and Bengula, in less than six months disposed of the greatest
part of our cargo, and purchased four hundred negroes, my adventure having been
laid out chiefly in gold dust.

Our compliment being made up, we took our departure from Cape Negro, and
arrived in the Rio de la Plata in six weeks, having met with nothing remarkable
in our voyage, except an epidemic fever, not unlike the jail distemper, which
broke out among our slaves, and carried off a good many of the ship's company;
among whom I lost one of my mates, and poor Strap had well nigh given up the
ghost. -- Having produced our passport to the Spanish governor, we were
received with great courtesy, sold our slaves in a very few days, and could
have put off five times the number at our own price; being obliged to smuggle
the rest of our merchandise, consisting of European bale goods, which however
we made shift to dispose of at a great advantage.

CHAP. LXVI.
I am invited to the Villa of a Spanish Don, where we meet with an English
gentleman, and make a very interesting discovery -- we leave Buenos Airs, and
arrive at Jamaica.

OUR ship being freed from the disagreeable lading of Negroes, to whom indeed I
had been a miserable slave, since our leaving the coast of Guinea, I began to
enjoy myself, and breathe with pleasure the pure air of Paraguay, this part of
which is reckoned the Montpelier of South America, and has obtained, on account
of its climate, the name of Buenos Airs. -- It was in this delicious place,
that I gave myself entirely up to the thoughts of my dear Narcissa, whose image
still kept full possession of my breast, and whose charms, enhanced by absence,
appeared to my imagination, if possible, more engaging than ever! I calculated
the profits of my voyage, which even exceeded my expectation; resolved to
purchase a handsome sine-cure upon my arrival in England, and if I should find
the Squire as averse to me as ever, marry his sister by stealth; and in case
our family should increase, rely upon the generosity of my uncle, who was by
this time worth a considerable sum.

While I amused myself with these agreeable projects, and the transporting
hopes of enjoying Narcissa, we were very much caressed by the Spanish
gentlemen, who frequently formed parties of pleasure for our entertainment, in
which we made excursions a good way into the country. Among those who
signalized themselves by their civility to us, there was one Don Antonio de
Ribera, a very polite young gentleman, with whom I had contracted an intimate
friendship, who invited us one day to his country house, and as a further
inducement to our compliance, promised to procure for us the company of an
English signor, who had been settled in these parts many years, and acquired
the love and esteem of the whole province by his affability, good sense, and
honorable behavior.

We accepted his invitation, and set out for his Villa, where we had not been
longer than an hour, when the person arrived, in whose favor I had been so
much prepossessed. -- He was a tall man, remarkably well shaped, of a fine mein
and appearance commanding respect, and seemed to be turned of sorty; the
features of his face were saddened with a reserve and gravity, which in other
countries would have been thought the effect of melancholy; but here, appeared
to have been contracted by his commerce with the Spaniards, who are remarkable
for that severity of countenance: Understanding from Don Antonio, that we were
his countrymen, he saluted us all ^ound very complaisantly, and fixing his eyes
attentively on me, uttered a deep sigh. -- I had been struck with a profound
veneration for him at his first coming into the room; and no sooner observed
this expression of his sorrow, directed, as it were, in a particular manner to
me, than my heart took part in his grief, I sympathized involuntarily, and
sighed in my turn. -- Having asked leave of our entertainer, he accosted us in
English, professed his satisfaction at seeing so many of his countrymen in such
a remote place, and asked the captain, who went by the name of Signor Thoma,
from what part of Britain he sailed, and whither he was bound. -- My uncle told
him that we had sailed from the river Thames, and were bound for the same
place, by the way of Jamaica, where we intended to take in a lading of sugar.

Having satisfied himself in these and other particulars about the state of the
war, he gave us to understand, that he had a longing desire to revisit his
native country, in consequence of which, he had already transmitted to Europe
the greatest part of his fortune in neutral bottoms, and would willingly embark
the rest of it, with himself, in our ship, provided the captain had no
objection to such a passenger. -- My uncle very prudently replied, that for his
part, he should be glad of his company, if he could procure the consent of the
governor, without which he durst not admit him on board, whatever inclination
he had to oblige him. -- The gentleman approved of his discretion, and telling
him, that there would be no difficulty in obtaining the connivance of the
governor, who was his good friend, shifted the conversation to another subject.

I was overjoyed to hear his intention, and already interested myself so much
in his favor, that had he been disappointed, I should have been very unhappy:
In the course of our entertainment, he eyed me with uncommon attachment; I felt
a surprising attraction toward him; when he spoke, I listened with attention
and reverence; the dignity of his deportment filled me with affection and awe;
and in short, the emotions of my soul, in presence of this stranger, were
strong and unaccountable.

Having spent the best part of the day with us, he took his leave, telling
captain Thoma, that he would hear from him in a short time: He was no sooner
gone, than I asked a thousand questions about him, of Don Antonio, who could
give me no other satisfaction, than that his name was Don Rodriguez, that he
had lived fifteen or sixteen years in these parts, was reputed rich, and
supposed to have been unfortunate in his younger years, because he was observed
to nourish a pensive melancholy, even from the time of his first settlement
among them; but that no body had ventured to enquire into the cause of his
sorrow, in consideration of his peace, which might suffer in the recapitulation
of his misfortunes.

I was seized with an irresistible desire of knowing the particulars of his
fate, and enjoyed not one hour of repose during the whole night, by reason of
the eager conceptions that inspired me, with regard to his story, which I
resolved (if possible) to learn. -- Next morning, while we were at breakfast,
three mules richly caparisoned arrived, with a message from Don Rodriguez,
desiring our company, and that of Don Antonio, at his house, which was situated
about ten miles further up in the country. -- I was pleased with this
invitation, in consequence of which we mounted the mules which he had provided
for us, and alighted at his house before noon. -- Here we were splendidly
entertained by the generous stranger, who still seemed to show a particular
regard for me, and after dinner, made me a present of a ring set with a
beautiful amethyst, the production of that country, saying at the same time,
that he was once blessed with a son, who, had he lived, would have been nearly
of my age. This observation, delivered with a profound sigh, made my heart
throb with violence; a crowd of confused ideas rushed upon my imagination,
which, while I endeavored to unravel, my uncle perceived my absence of
thought, and tapping me on the shoulder, said, "Oons! are you asleep, Rory!"
Before I had time to reply, Don Rodriguez, with an uncommon eagerness of voice
and look, pronounced, "Pray, captain, what is the young gentleman's name?" --
"His name (said my uncle) is Roderick Random." -- "Gracious Powers!" (cried the
stranger, starting up) -- "And his mother's -- His mother (answered the
captain, amazed) was called Charlotte Bowling." -- "O bounteous heaven!
(exclaimed Don Rodriguez, springing across the table, and clasping me in his
arms) my son! my son! have I found thee again? do I hold thee in my embrace,
after having lost and despaired of seeing thee, so long?" So saying, he fell
upon my neck and wept aloud with joy; while the power of nature operating
strongly in my breast, I was lost in rapture, and while he pressed me to his
heart, let fall a shower of tears into his bosom. -- His utterance was choked
up a good while, by the agitation of his soul; at length he broke out into
"Mysterious Providence! -- O my dear Charlotte! there yet remains a pledge of
our love! and such a pledge! -- so found! -- O infinite goodness! let me adore
thy allwise decrees!" Having thus expressed himself, he kneeled upon the floor,
lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven, and remained some minutes in a silent
exstacy of devotion: I put myself in the same posture, adored the all good
Disposer in a prayer of mental thanksgiving; and when his ejaculation was
ended, did homage to my father, and craved his parental blessing. He hugged me
again with unutterable fondness, and having implored the protection of heaven
upon my head, raised me from the ground, and presented me as his son to the
company, who wept in concert over this affecting scene. -- Among the rest my
uncle did not fail of discovering the goodness and joy of his heart, albeit
unused to the melting mood; he blubbered with great tenderness, and wringing my
father's hand, cried, "Brother Random, I Am rejoiced to see you -- God be
praised for this happy meeting." -- Don Rodriguez, understanding that he was
his brother-in-law, embraced him affectionately, saying, "Are you my
Charlotte's brother? -- alas! unhappy Charlotte! -- but why should I repine? we
shall meet again, never more to part! -- Brother, you are truly welcome -- Dear
son, I am transported with unspeakable joy! -- This day is a jubilee -- my
friends and servants shall share my satisfaction."

While he dispatched messengers to the gentlemen in the neighborhood, to
annonce this event, and gave orders for a grand entertainment, I was so much
affected with the tumults of passion, which assailed me on this great, sudden,
and unexpected occasion, that I fell sick, fevered, and in less than three
hours, became quite delirious; so that the preparations were countermanded, and
the joy of the family converted into grief and despair. -- Physicians were
instantly called, I was plentifully blooded in the foot, my lower extremities
were bathed in a decoction of salutiferous herbs; in ten hours after I was
taken ill, I enjoyed a critical sweat, and next day, felt no remains of the
distemper, but an agreeable lassitude, which did not hinder me from getting up
-- During the progress of this fever, which, from the term of its duration, is
called Ephemera, my father never once quitted my bedside, but administered the
prescriptions of the physicians with the most pious care; while Captain Bowling
manifested his concern by the like attendance. -- I no sooner found myself
delivered from the disease, than I bethought myself of my honest friend Strap;
and resolving to make him happy forthwith, in the knowledge of my good fortune,
told my father, in general, that I had been infinitely obliged to this faithful
adherent; and begged he would indulge me so far as to send for him, without
letting him know my happiness, until he could receive an account of it from my
own mouth.

My request was instantly complied with, and a messenger with a spare mule
detached to the ship, carrying orders from the captain to the mate to send the
steward by the bearer. -- My health being, in the mean time, re-established,
and my mind composed, I began to relish this important turn of my fortune, in
reflecting upon the advantages with which it must be attended; and as the idea
of my lovely Narcissa always joined itself to every scene of happiness I could
imagine, I entertained myself now, with the prospect of possessing her in that
distinguished sphere, to which she was entitled by her birth and
qualifications. -- Having often mentioned her name while I was deprived of my
senses, my father guessed that there was an intimate connection between us, and
discovering the picture which hung in my bosom by a ribbon, did not doubt that
it was the resemblance of my amiable mistress: In this belief he was confirmed
by my uncle, who told him that it was the picture of a young woman, to whom I
was under promise of marriage. -- Alarmed at this piece of information, Don
Rodriguez took the first opportunity of questioning me about the circumstances
of this affair, which when I had heartily recounted, he approved of my passion,
and promised to contribute all in his power toward its success: though I never
doubted his generosity, I was transported on this occasion, and throwing myself
at his feet, told him, he had now completed my happiness; for without the
possession of Narcissa, I should be miserable among all the pleasures of life.
-- He raised me with a smile of paternal fondness; said, he knew what it was to
be in love; and observed, that if he had been as tenderly beloved by his
father, as I was by mine, he would not now, perhaps, have cause -- Here he was
interrupted by a sigh, the tear stood collected in his eye, he suppressed the
dictates of his grief, and the time being opportune, desired me to relate the
passages of my life, which my uncle had told him were manifold and surprising.
-- I recounted the most material circumstances of my fortune, to which he
listened with wonder and attention, manifesting from time to time those
different emotions, which my different situations may be supposed to have
raised in a parent's breast; and when my detail was ended, blessed God for the
adversity I had undergone, which, he said, enlarged the understanding, improved
the heart, steeled the constitution, and qualified a young man for all the
duties and enjoyments of life, much better than any education which affluence
could bestow.

When I had thus satisfied his curiosity, I discovered an inclination to hear
the particulars of his story, which he gratified, by beginning with his
marriage, and proceeding to the day of his disappearing, as I have related in
the first part of my memoirs, "Careless of life (continued he) and unable to
live in a place where every object recalled the memory of my dear Charlotte,
whom I had lost through the barbarity of an unnatural parent, I took my leave
of you, my child, then an infant, with an heart full of unutterable woe, but
little suspecting that my father's unkindness would have descended to my
innocent orphan; and setting out alone, at midnight, for the nearest seaport,
early next morning got on board a ship, bound, as I had heard, for France, and
bargaining with the master for my passage, bid a long adieu to my native
country, and put to sea with the first fair wind. The place of our destination
was Granville, but we had the misfortune to run upon a ridge of rocks near the
island of Alderney called the Gaskets, where the sea running high, the ship
went to pieces, the boat sunk along-side, and every soul on board perished,
except myself, who by the assistance of a grating, got ashore on the coast of
Normandy: I went directly to Caen, where I was so lucky as to meet with a
Count, whom I had formerly known in my travels: With this gentleman, I set out
for Paris, where I was recommended by him and other friends, as a tutor to a
young nobleman, whom I accompanied to the court of Spain. -- There we remained
a whole year, at the end of which my pupil being recalled by his father, I
quitted my office and staid behind, by the advice of a certain Spanish grandee
who took me into his protection, and introduced me to another nobleman, who was
afterward created Viceroy of Peru. -- He insisted on my attending him to his
government in the Indies, where, however, by reason of my religion, it was not
in his power to make my fortune any other way than by encouraging me to trade,
which I had not long prosecuted when my patron died, and I found myself in the
midst of strangers, without one friend to support or protect me; urged by this
consideration, I sold my effects and removed to this country, the governor of
which having been appointed by the Viceroy, was my intimate acquaintance. --
Here has heaven prospered my endeavors, during a residence of sixteen years,
in which my tranquillity was never invaded, but by the remembrance of your
mother, whose death I have in secret mourned without ceasing; and the
reflection of you, whose sat I could never learn, notwithstanding all my
inquiries, by means of my friends in France, who, after the most strict
examination, could give me no other account, than that you went abroad six
years ago, and was never after heard of. -- I could not rest satisfied with
this imperfect information, and though my hope of finding you was but languid,
resolved to go in quest of you in person; for which purpose, I have remitted to
Holland the value of twenty thousand pound, and am in possession of fifteen
thousand more, with which I intended to embark myself on board of captain
Bowling, before I discovered this amazing stroke of providence, which you may
be sure has not altered my intention."

My father having entertained us with this agreeable sketch of his life,
withdrew in order to relieve Don Antonio, who in his absence, had done the
honors of his house; and I was just dressed for my appearance among the
guests, when Strap arrived from the ship.

He no sooner entered the grand apartment, in which I was, and saw the
magnificence of my apparel, than his speech was lost in amazement, and he gaped
in silence at the objects that surrounded him. -- I took him by the hand,
observed that I had sent for him to be a witness and sharer of my happiness,
and told him I had found a father. -- At these words he started, and after
having continued some minutes with his mouth and eyes wide open, cried, "Aha!
-- odd, I know what! go thy ways, poor Narcissa, and go thy ways somebody else
-- well -- Lord, what a thing is love? -- God help us! are all our mad pranks
and protestations come to this? what! and you have fixed your habitation in
this distant land! God prosper you -- I find we must part at last -- for I
would not leave my poor carcass so far from my native home, for all the wealth
of the universe!" With these ejaculations, he began to sob and make wry faces;
upon which I assured him of his mistake, both in regard to Narcissa, and my
staying in Paraguay, and informed him as briefly as I could, of the great event
which had happened. -- Never was rapture more ludicrously expressed, than in
the behavior of this worthy creature, who cried, laughed, whistled, sung and
danced, all in a breath; his transport was scarce over, when my father entered,
who no sooner understood that this was Strap, than he took him by the hand,
saying, "Is this the honest man, who befriended you so much in your distress?
your are welcome to my house, and I shall soon put it in the power of my son to
reward you for your good offices in his behalf; in the mean time, go with us
and partake of the repast that is provided." Strap, wild as he was with joy,
would by no means accept of the proffered honor, crying, "God forbid! I know my
distance -- your worship shall excuse me." And Don Rodriguez finding his
modesty invincible, recommended him to his Major Domo, to be treated with the
utmost respect; while he carried me into a large saloon, where I was presented
to a numerous company, who loaded me with compliments and caresses, and
congratulated my father in terms not proper for me to repeat.

Without specifying the particulars of our entertainment, let it suffice to
say, it was at the same time elegant and sumptuous, and the rejoicing lasted
two days: After which, Don Rodriguez settled his affairs, converted his effects
into silver and gold, visited and took leave of all his friends, who were
grieved at his departure, and honored me with considerable presents; and
coming on board of my uncle's ship, with the first favorable wind we sailed
from the Rio de la Plato, and in two months came safe to an anchor in the
harbor of Kingston in the island of Jamaica.

CHAP. LXVII.
I visit my old friend Thomson -- we set sail for Europe, meet with an odd
adventure -- arrive in England -- I ride across the country from Portsmouth to
Sussex -- converse with Mrs. Sagely, who informs me of Narcissa's being in
London -- in consequence of this intelligence, I proceed to Canterbury -- meet
with my old friend Morgan -- arrive at London -- visit Narcissa -- introduce my
father to her -- he is charmed with her good sense and beauty -- we come to a
determination of demanding her brother's consent to our marriage.
