ON the day following our strength being augmented, we gave out Romeo and
Juliet. I was to play Romeo and Miss Slash'em Juliet, and we had a full house;
but, it so happened, that when I came to the tomb scene, though I had rehearsed
it several times before, having nothing but the handle of an old spade to force
the door, I was so out of humor, that I drove at it with more violence than
was requisite, and the whole fabric came down upon poor Juliet who lay within,
and I upon the top of it; she received a contusion on her forehead, and
screamed as for life. The audience thinking she was more hurt, than in reality
she was, took part in her distress, and many of them jumped upon the stage to
extricate her from her difficulty; and when they found she had a bump on her
face, they very humanely excused our going on with the piece, and desired they
might have the farce. It was the Mock Doctor again, and I acquitted myself with
such eclat, that the accident in the play was forgotten.

THE next day the Mayor's lady, Mrs. Girkin, sent to us to beg we would play
Alexander the Great, and though it required for the procession a greater stock
of clothes than our wardrobe could furnish, and we made this as an excuse, yet
the difficulty was got over, as through her interest we were to have the use of
half a dozen surplices from the college, and as many vergers coats from the
abbey, and if we wanted it, she said, we should have the Mayor's mace, and the
rest of the insignia of his office: but the gentleman who was to play Alexander
(for all players, be they ever so low, are gentlemen and gentlewomen;) I say,
the gentleman who was to play Alexander, observed that the crown was not come
from the tinmans, and a man might as well attempt the character of a general,
without a truncheon; as a king in procession without a crown. This want was too
great to admit of any substitute and the death of Alexander was obliged to be
postponed till a farther day.

WITH the assistance of brown paper and vinegar, Miss Slash'em soon got rid of
the protuberance on her forehead, and in a day or two, we were to appear in the
characters of Othello and Desdemona; the evening came, and the house was again
as full as it could hold. Seldom a night we played, but some awkward accident
occurred, that made the audience laugh as much at a tragedy, as at the drollest
farce we could perform, and I verily believe, the hopes of such accidents, drew
more to the theater than any real inclination to see the piece; and fortune,
some how or other, concurred to be of use to us in this particular. I had
blacked my face for the character of the Moor, and, finding the house full, was
in the best of spirits, and my Desdemona looking more lovely than I had ever
seen her; having never rehearsed the part with my face blacked, I forgot
myself, and when I was to embrace her, I could not resist kissing her with
fervency; the misfortune was, the black came off from my face upon here is, the
house laughed immoderately, and she was so mortified, that she gave me such a
back-handed slap on the face, as set my mouth a bleeding: the house was in roar
of applause, and nothing was heard from all parts of it, but encore, encore,

I MENTION these occurrences as the only matters worthy observation in such a
vagabond company as I had the honor to belong to. If it hurt our reputation,
it however filled our pockets, for the nights I played, I seldom divided less
than between four and five pounds.

IN a very few days, the crown was completed and the play of Alexander given
out; but Mrs. Mayoress, having sprained her ancle, could not possibly be
present; it was lucky, indeed, that she had sprained her ancle, as she would
have been disappointed in the performance. Alexander the Great had; the night
before, drank too many libations to the god Bacchus, at the alehouse where he
spent the evening; had quarreled with some of the company, and had beat one man
very much. The consequence was, that he got a warrant from the Mayor, and just
as the piece was going to begin, a constable found his way behind the scenes,
seized Alexander by the collar, and took him away in his royal robes to Mr.
Girkin's justice-room, with a whole mob behind him, and on Mrs. Girkin's
enquiring who all that rabble was below; his worship told her, with a degree of
pleasantry, That, as she was too lame to go to the play-shop; Alexander the
Great with his body guards was come to play the part at her house. In short,
this unlucky circumstance obliged us to apologize to the audience for changing
the piece, and another was exhibited in its room.

THE mayor, in his time, had been a gallant spark, and a great admirer of the
ladies, and though he was now on the verge of sixty, he had somehow or other
been smitten by the cupids in Miss Slash'em's eyes, and longed for nothing so
much as a tete-a-tete with her; but the difficulty was how to see her, and not
fall under the observation of his wife, who, when her resentment was roused,
was one of the greatest viragos in the city of Winchester. He had once
expressed an inclination that Mrs. Girkin would ask Miss Slash'em some
afternoon to tea. Miss Slash'em to tea! Invite a vagabond player to our house
to tea! exclaimed Mrs. Girkin. Sure man, you must be out of your senses! --
What Is become of all your dignity, Mr. Girkin? What, do you think, the ladies
of our corporation would say, were they to hear of such a thing? -- We should
be the jest of the whole city. This Mr. Mayor told Miss Slash'em, one afternoon
at her lodgings, and she told it to me again; for, finding his wife would not
receive her, he found a way to invite himself to the object of his wishes, by
waiting on Biddy Slash'em with a present of a small jar of pickles, as an
acknowledgement, as he was pleased to say, for the entertainment she had
afforded him at the play-shop. Biddy, who I found was always open-handed, more
ready to receive, than people to give, and nothing seeming to come amiss to
her, encouraged the mayor's visits, as she had done those of the linen-draper's
apprentice at St. Albans, and indeed, he was there oftener than it was
convenient or agreeable to me. He used to visit her in the evenings we did not
perform, under a pretense of going to a new established club. But his wife
suspected him, had him traced and found out his haunts.

ONE morning at breakfast with Miss Slash'em, she gave me the following account
of the last of the mayor's visits. The evening before last, said she, he tapped
at my door, calling in an under voice, my dear Biddy, are you alone? I told him
I was, and he waddled in with a bottle of Lucca olives in his hand, which he
said, he brought for my own eating; they were just imported and some of the
best of the kind -- he begged for a plate that he might show me how good they
were. I handed a plate and he turned half of them out, for the bottle held but
a pint. Few as there were, he fell voraciously to work, and would scarce give
me an opportunity of tasting them. I put one into my mouth out of complaisance,
and indeed but one, as it is a fruit I am not very fond of. He asked me to take
another, but I told him, I never eat such things in an afternoon; he asked me
no more, but devoured the whole of them himself, whilst he was with me,
praising them all the time.

SHE paid me the compliment to say, that she often wished him away, as she
expected me; but she could not get rid of him, and he kept teasing her the
whole evening. Often would he break out into fits of ecstasy, squeezing my hand,
says she, or pressing my knees, with, Thou, dear little charming creature! --
and then to the olives again, with They are very fine fruit -- I brought them
purely for your own eating. He should have said his own; for, as I observed
before, he devoured the whole of them. At last, says Miss Slash'em, I heard
some one coming up stairs, for her apartment communicated with the passage, and
that with the street; and the mayor was exceedingly alarmed lest he should be
discovered: for he told me, continued she, that if his coming to me was known
to his wife, he should never hear the last of it. He tried to get under the
bed. Miss Slash'em had but one room, and the bed stood at the farther end of
it. He tried, says she, to get under the bed, but his belly was too big, and it
was impracticable. I then pointed to a small closet and hurried him into it;
but it was so shallow, that the door would not shut close, and he was under the
necessity of standing tiptoe, and holding it to. Having thus concealed him, I
opened the chamber door to a person that knocked, conceiving it to be you, but
I was disappointed; it was a woman tolerably well dressed, about the age of
forty, and in corpulency pretty nearly as big as the mayor; her face was as red
as the gills of a turkey cock, and she seemed to be out of breath with
ascending the stairs. She asked, if my name was Slash'em, and on my telling
her, it was, apologized for the abrupt visit she had made me, but that her
peace of mind was at stake, and she hoped I would excuse it. She said, her name
was Girkin. -- I was a good deal alarmed at this, as I feared a discovery and
dreaded the consequences, for she seemed to be a violent one. Miss Shash'em,
says Mrs. Girkin, throwing herself into a great armed chair, have you seen my
husband lately? Madam, replied I, I am a stranger to your husband, and should
not know him, was I to see him. Then, you are greatly belied, says she, for I
understand he visits this house often. If that be the case, returned I, his
visits must be to some person below or above, for the house is full of lodgers
-- it cannot be to me. I beg your pardon, says she, if I do you wrong; but you
must know, Miss Slash'em, my husband, Mr. Girkin -- that is Mr. Mayor, though
an old man, is a very wicked old man; nothing that wears a cap can escape him;
I cannot keep a maid servant for him; he is always pulling and hawling them
about; and all to no purpose; if you knew as much as I know, you would be of my way
of thinking; there is not a trull that comes into the shop for a half penny
worth of vinegar, or a farthing's worth of matches, that he is not leering at,
and to his ternal disgrace. He is a gentleman, Miss Slash'em, a justice of the
king's peace, and a man of dignity; and he owes it all to me; for, if I had not
insisted upon his taking up his freedom, he would never have been Mayor of
Winchester now; nor should we ever have been respected, as we are: but I Will
expose the wretch, I Will let the corporation know -- they take him to be a man
of sense, but, between you and me, there is not a greater fool under heaven. --
When there is any thing in the justicing way going on, I am always obliged to
help out; but, I would not have him know I said so, on any account, for we may
as well keep peace at home if one can; that makes me keep it a secret; and I
look upon you, Miss Slash'em, to be a lady of too much honor to tell it again.
I told her, she might rely upon me, that nothing she had said should transpire.
At this moment the olive bottle struck her eye, as it stood upon the
mantle-piece. She took hold of it, said she knew that bottle, and he must have
been with me this afternoon, for that the bottle came from her shop, and that
within these two hours, as the hamper that contained them, was just brought to
their house, and had scarce been opened: so that I am sure I am right, and
doubt whether he is not concealed some where in the room now; casting here eyes
round the chamber. -- I assured her it was all conjecture. Don't dissemble Miss
'Slash'em, says she, reddening with anger, don't tell me a lie; it is a shame
for any woman to encourage another woman's husband, as you have done mine. Mr.
Girkin is a poor mean-spirited wretch, or he would be above condescending to come
into the lodgings of a vagabond actress and strolling strumpet. I desired her,
if she did not know how to behave herself, to leave my room; for I could not
suffer myself to be insulted to my face. At this she grew more angry still,
abused her husband in the grossest terms, called me a prevaricating hussy --
said, that strolling players were a nuisance to every place they came into --
and that she would take care to have us all sent to prison: in short, she
stormed so loud and made such a riot as brought up the family from belowl. They
endeavored to pacify her, but all to no purpose: she was told, she said, he
came into the house but a little before her, and, from the olive bottle, she
was sure he was not far off at that moment. Mr. Girkin hearing this, and
endeavoring, by rising higher on his toes, to pull the closet door closer,
lost his equilibrium, and tumbled forward right into the room, throwing down a
chair on which a chamber pot stood, which the ladies had, during this
conversation, made use of, and broke it into a thousand pieces. At this
accident, she got up in the utmost fury; cried, now the murder's out: she
kicked him several times, and gave her tongue full play. A pretty figure truly,
says she, for the mayor of a town! Ar'n't you ashamed, you sneaking fool -- to
see yourself so exposed? Is this your dignity? -- What will the corporation
say; for I Will take care to have it known throughout the city? -- Is this the
return I Am to have, for all my pains to make a gentleman of you? -- Not a word
could she get from him; at which she picked up his hat with one hand, and his
cane with the other, and laid on upon him with both, so unmercifully, that the
poor henpecked devil could escape only by flight. He made the best of his way
down the stairs, and she after him, and I thus got rid of my company altogether.

MISS Slash'em asked me, if I had heard of it from any one but her. Not so
particularly, replied I, as you have related it; but the greater part of the
story is in every one's mouth, and his worship is so much laughed at, that he
dare not show his face abroad. There is a variety of tales respecting it. One
is, that he was found in bed with you; another, that you concealed him in the
bed; another, that Mrs. Girkin threw the chamber pot at his head; another, that
he was not discovered at all, but made his escape out of a back window upon a
shed beneath it; and as stories never lose by carrying, it is said, that his
weight carried him through that shed, and that he fell right into a water tub
below. In short, there are always as many stories as there are persons to tell
it; for so happy are most people at invention, that they generally add some
little of their own; so that if you hear a story at a tenth or twelfth hand,
the spurious tale bears no resemblance to its original. -- But the worst story,
my dear Biddy, says I, is, that an order is come down this morning from the
mayor, not to perform any more under the peril of commitment. I have no doubt
but its Mrs. Girkin's doings, but that is of little consequence to us. The
manager is gone to the mayor to see what can be done, and if his application
proves ineffectual, we must pack up and begone.
