THE accident that happened at our house, filled the whole family with
confusion; but my father's receipt of your letter unveiled the mystery. Our
porter, who was only stunned with the blow you gave him, soon recovered, and on
being taken before a magistrate, confessed that he had been bribed by an agent
of Lord B --, to assist in seizing you, in order to send you on board a ship
and convey you to some distant place from whence you might not return. He was
committed till such time as the coroner had sat on the man you killed, but the
inquest having brought in their verdict killed in self-defence, and you not
being found to prosecute, he was discharged. My father, however, took him into
the house no more; and to do him justice, was very anxious to have all the
parties punished. He valued you for the good office you had done his daughter,
and was very desirous of revenging your cause.

THE affair, however, was soon forgotten, and as you was not to be heard of,
Lord B. wished for leave to renew his addresses; you are acquainted with my
sentiments on that subject, and my father was no less averse to it: he
endeavored to make it appear, that his rashness was a proof of the strong
affection he bore me; but it was listened to by neither of us: my mother
commended my determination, and my father, as the proposed settlements could
not be made, was not to be brought over. Lord B. however, was importunate, and
his visits, though unwelcome, were so frequent at our house, that my father
thought proper to retire to his seat in the north: where, in a short time
after, my mother died; by whose death, as I told you, I am entitled to an
estate of three hundred pounds a year, but which my father has never given me
the possession of.

WE had not been two years in the country, before a young gentleman, a Roman
Catholic, of a good family, and considerable estate, then on a visit to a
Baronet in our neighborhood, thought proper to pay his addresses to me, which
I politely but peremptorily declined. Not discouraged, however, by this, he
preferred his suit to my father, and brought him over to his cause. Eliza, said
he, one day to me, whilst at breakfast, heaven has thought proper to deprive me
of your mother, and, according to the course of nature, it cannot be long
before I follow her. I have no attachment to this world but you, and could I
see you respectably and happily settled, I should not care how soon I left it.
The gentleman you have seen, is a young man of good family, and of considerable
landed property; he is universally esteemed by all who know him, and an
alliance with him would give me great pleasure. He has made me very honorable
proposals of marriage for you, and I think you cannot do better than receive
him. With respect to settlements he has offered a carte blanch, and you may
make what terms you think proper.

I TOLD him, that not only duty, but gratitude would lead me to pay every
proper attention to his recommendation, particularly in a case where I was
convinced he studied only my happiness; that under this idea, I flattered
myself he would leave me mistress of my own actions, especially in a matter
that so nearly concerned me; that sorry as I was, not to acquiesce with him, I
must take the liberty of putting a negative upon the proposal; for that I had
been so sickened of matrimony upon a former occasion, that I must be altered in
my nature before I could listen to a second proposal; that I was very well
contented with my present situation, and wished for no change, and that if it
pleased Providence to remove him from me, I trusted I should have sufficient to
support me to the utmost of my ambition.

IT would be idle to recount to you, the long debate that was held between us
upon this subject. On his part, it was carried on with warmth, but I was
resolved to keep my engagement with you, conceiving that some accident had
prevented my hearing from you; for the letters, you say you wrote, never
reached me, owing probably to our removal from London. When my father found me
determined not to listen to this proposal, he became exasperated, and deprived
me of almost every indulgence. In short, not to tire you out with accounts,
that would be irksome to you to hear, and distressing to me to tell; he
insisted on it, that I should not live with him, but retire to a convent and
take the veil; for he would sooner see me in my coffin, than that I should do
any thing to disgrace his family. No entreaties, no prayers of mine could turn
him from his purpose; my life was grown a burden to me; I despaired of hearing
any more from you, and, of course, submitted to his disposal of me; and I
believe, as averse as I found myself to a sequestered life, had chance not
thrown you in my way, I should have been prevailed on, by the ladies in the
house where I was; and, at the end of my noviceship, have taken the veil.

I HAD now been three months abroad, and as the matter had blown over, for
which I left England, and the ministry was changed, I conceived there could be
no danger in returning, and accordingly quitted St. Omer's, and set off for
London.

WHEN we reached London, till we could get a lodging, we put up at one of those
taverns called hotels, where, under a false idea of furnishing better
accommodations than is to be met with at inns, they contrive to pick the
pockets of their guests. My plan of operations was to return to the profession
of an author, which I conceived, not only to be the most lucrative I could
pursue, but the most respectable, trusting to Providence for future
expectancies; but seeing in one of the newspapers an advertisement that struck
me, from a man who advertised places under government to be disposed of; with
the earliest intelligence of vacancies in all departments; and being in
possession of a little money, I was willing first to try what I could do here;
I accordingly waited on Provider the place-monger, (for that was the
advertiser's name) and the following was, as near as I can recollect, the
dialogue that passed between us.

Author. I think, Sir, your name is -- Provider?


Provider. At your service, Sir.


Author. A dealer in -- places?


Provider. I have it in my power to accommodate gentlement in that way.


Author. What places have you vacant? I wish to be a purchaser of some easy
genteel employ about the king.


Provider. Oh Sir, we have always such things dropping; even from a turn-spit,
to a Lord of the Treasury. -- What is your profession, Sir, and of what country
are you?


Author. I am an author, and an Englishman.


Provider. An author! -- and an Englishman! -- Gad so; that is a little awkward
-- I fear I shall find a difficulty in suiting you; for the court has a natural
aversion to men of literature, and to such as are not born on the other side
the Tweed. There was a time when reading was in fashion, and our great men
looked a little beyond the line of life in which they walked; but it is the
reverse now; we wish for no information beyond ourselves, and wilfully shut our
eyes and ears to every thing that is doing without the palacegates. A learned
man at St. James's would be as much in the way, as a Morocco ambassador or a
native of Otaheite. -- Even a birthday ode is considered now as a bore A
fashionable word for a tiresome repetition.
.


Author. If it be not impertinent, Sir, I would ask you the channel through
which you are able to be of so much service to the public?


Provider. That is one of the arcana of the bona dea, a secret not to be
divulged. The chief of our places are procured through the medium of the
ladies; but the methods they make use of, is a mystery beyond our know ledge.
Business is very dead at my office, when we have sober old men at the head of
the various departments; but when we have a chancellor, a chamberlain, a lord
steward, and so on, young enough, and wicked enough to keep girls, we have
always something stirring. -- If old places don't drop, we create new ones. --
Should you like any thing up stairs, or would you prefer it in the kitchen?


Author. These are not so genteel; -- are they?


Provider. All places about his Majesty are genteel, not excepting even his
chimney sweeper and his nightman. His footmen are esquires, and his grooms of
the bedchamber are no more.


Author. Being a gentleman by birth, and having had a good education, I am
eligible to any employ; but I should wish for one with little attendance.


Provider. Gentleman and education are out of the question -- these
qualifications ill suit with courtiers; who are obliged to submit now to such
indignities and mortifications, that a man of any spirit or abilities will not
be seen among them. Formerly, none but men of birth and talents were to be
found within the palace, but now men of all ranks and denominations crowd in,
many to be made gentlemen. As you seem desirous of a place, where little
attendance is required, perhaps you would like a sinecure: we have great plenty
of these, and of course they are often dropping; or we could saddle you upon a
commissioner of the customs or excise; -- though now I think on it, these
gentlemen are skittish, and are very restive, unless they are ridden This is
obliging a commissioner to pay a certain annuity out of his salary, to a person
fixed upon him, and who is then said to ride him.
by ladies. -- Let me see -- (looking over his list) here is a place that
perhaps may suit you, and is now vacant.


Author. What is it?


Provider. Sweeper of the Mall; the salary, one hundred pounds a year, is
almost a sinecure, and may be done by deputy; with five-and-twenty pounds a
year for brooms that are never used.


Author. I should wish for a better income.


Provider. Oh, we can add as many hundreds to it as you please; this we often
do, in proportion to the purchase money: or there is the keeper of the lions --
it is a better place and will be shortly vacant, for he is now ill, and his
apothecary is my particular friend.


Author. You have a numerous acquaintance, I apprehend, among the medical tribe?


Provider. Making fresh acquaintance among them every day. -- I have a long
folio list of the apothecaries every placeman employs. This we find out by our
runners; and this knowledge is of great use to my office; as, through them, I
always get the first intelligence of any illness.


Author, laughing. And send them out of the world some years before their time.


Provider. No, not quite so. -- A placeman always lives till his friends and
his employers are tired of him; and if his days by any accident are shortened,
it is only removing him from an envious and ill-natured world.


Author. You was saying, I think, Mr. Provider, that you frequently procure
additional salaries, to be added to old offices.


Provider. Frequently.


Author. But this is a bad way of disposing of the public money, for many
offices are too well paid already.


Provider. Ministers are often obliged to this, when they have not a place
vacant of sufficient magnitude to stop the mouth of a needy and craving
patriot; and, if they could not do the same now and then to serve themselves,
it would be a hard case. Who would be a minister of this country, and stand the
baiting like a bull, unless he could have the fingering of a little of the
public cash? -- As you say you are an author, Sir, if you will undertake to
puff the ministry for a twelvemonth in some of the public prints, I may
possibly procure you a pension of two or three hundred pounds a year, for half
the purchase money you would otherwise be obliged to pay. Our price is
generally five years purchase for an employ, and nine years for a sinecure or
pension; but, if you lay it on pretty thick in favor of public measures,
perhaps I may procure you a pension for five years purchase.


Author. You procure dignities sometimes for gentlemen, I presume?


Provider. Nothing more common. -- I got Mr. Alderman Fig, the grocer, created
a Baronet the other day, for less than five hundred pounds, besides the fees;
and I am now in treaty with Sir Slovenly Hogstye, the distiller, for an Irish
peerage. He has been moving heaven and earth these twenty years to accomplish
it, under the plea of public services, but those are such stale pretenses, as
will not go down nowa-days. He is obliged to have recourse to me at last.


Author. I fear you will render your titles, at this rate, very numerous and
very cheap.


Provider. No, no; we guard against this too; fearing it should happen, as lady
Sarcasm says, that she is afraid to spit out of her coach, lest she should spit
upon an Irish Lord.


IN short, from this man's account, not finding I could suit myself without a
considerable sum of money, more than I had to spare, I gave up the idea, and
determined to employ myself in the literary way. Accordingly I took a genteel
first floor in a private street, for which I was to pay one guinea and a half a
week and resumed my own name, Edward Wilbraham. I gave my hand a second time in
marriage to my dear Eliza, according to the ceremonies of the English church;
and when we were settled in our lodging, my next step was to seek out for
employ. My idea was to get into the pay of some opulent bookseller. I applied
to the man who printed the Flogger for me, made him my friend, and found him of
use to me. He recommended me, to a patriot bookseller, as a man whose talents
were adapted to any thing in the scribbling line, and as one (which weighs most
with the trade) who would write a great deal for a little money. To this man I
was introduced, and he asked me if I was a good hand at a speech. I told him I
was no orator, at least I had never tried my abilities that way. I don't want
you, says he, to bellow forth yourself; but can you pen a good bellowing speech
for another? My friend tells me, continued he, you are a pretty good
politician, and as a variety of ignorant and illiterate people now creep into
parliament, (some to shelter themselves from a jail, others hoping to get
something by mouthing at and baiting the minister) these persons are in
continual want of something to say, and I am daily applied to to get speeches
penned for them. If you are clever at this, I can employ you the whole
sessions: you have nothing to do, but to collect the subjects from the
newspapers, which generally announce the business that is to come on, that is
the order of a future day, and have the speech ready for delivery the day
before. And what, Sir, is to be my pay, says I, upon these occasions? That,
returns he, depends upon the length of the speech, and the shortness of the
time in which it is to be composed. Sometimes, says he, we don't know the
business twenty-four hours beforehand: in this case it is all night work, and
if cleverly done, I may give you a guinea, at other times we seldom exceed half
the money, and sometimes a crown. But you need not fear proper encouragement,
if you hit them off well, and are keen at a lash. Only take care to put the
tittles to your i's, and the crosses to your t's, and write pretty plain, or
some of my gentlemen will not be able to read them. I undertook the task, and
had sufficient employ; for as I threw into my speeches plenty of sarcasm,
invective, and now and then a Latin quotation, interspersed with an occasional
enecdote, to entertain and keep the hearers from yawning, taking care always to
preserve those elegant parliamentary phrases of Habits of intimacy, Versant in
order, Honorable gentleman in my eye, and the like; and as I had a happy knack
of penning them in different language and style, so as to adapt them to the
character of the speakers, there seldom passed a week during the whole
sessions, that I did not pick up four or five guineas. For a modest man I wrote
in the third person, for an egotist in the first, and never failed to give
scope to the natural feelings and disposition of the speaker. When parliament
broke up, I was employed to write sermons for the clergy. In this manufacture I
was not paid so well. Seldom could I get more than a crown for the best written
discourse, except it was wanted by a bishop, or it was required to be printed;
in these cases, I had half a guinea. Indeed the clergy cared not how short and
little declamatory they were; for a declamatory discourse requires too much
exertion and trouble in the delivery.

I SOON wrote myself into reputation, and was applied to by a gentleman
concerned in the reviews, to take a part in one of those periodical
publications, the pay for which was two guineas per sheet for the quantity I
supplied. I doubted my abilities in this business, as it required a thorough
knowledge of letters, to be able to criticize, with candor and precision, the
works of others. Candor, says he, we have nothing to do with; for it has been
long a custom to admit the author of a new publication, to write his own
criticisms: in such cases we not only save a guinea by the quantity of matter,
(for most authors are very verbose in their own praise) but we get a guinea or
two for its insertion: and as to difficulty, there is little or none; we only
expect a few cursory remarks, with here and there an entertaining extract. The
press so teems with publications, that were every work studied, we should never
get through them. We had a gentleman once, who would touch us off as much
poetry, mathematics, and physic, in two hours, as would employ four compositors
to set up for two days, and without much knowledge in either of the subjects;
but we have lost him; he is gone to be an overseer in a sugar plantation in
Jamaica, and we are in want of one to supply his place. You may as well try
your hand, and see what you can do. I smiled in my sleeve; but as I was not in
a situation to refuse an employ I thought I could undertake, I embraced the
proposal, especially as, according to the plan of my employer, it would take up
but little of my time.

THE next day a porter came with a bundle of new books on every science. I
looked them over, and meeting with a political tract, a subject in which I was
best read, I put together a variety of animadversions, and spun out my remarks
to a considerable length, but treated the author with as much justice and
candor as I could. On my transmitting the manuscript to the printer, he
thought proper to curtail it, by putting his pen through a variety of the best
arguments, which he was pleased to say were tedious and dry, but which he in
reality objected to, because the manuscript was more than he chose to pay for.
This vexed me exceedingly; but as I was writing for bread, I was obliged to
sacrifice my fame and submit.

It is no wonder that these monthly criticisms are in such low esteem, with men
of reading and good sense, when the printers of them will dock and mutilate a
manuscript as they think proper, and fill their pockets at the expense of their
credit. A very ingenious performance was one day brought me, with the following
laconic note, from one of the proprietors.

SIR,
The author of the book herewith sent, has been troublesome to us; by giving
him a lash, you will oblige your humble servant.


AT another time I received the following, with five octavo volumes, about
seven in the evening.

MR. Wilbraham is desired to transmit his remarks on the volumes herewith sent,
by nine tomorrow morning, or they will be too late for publication. IN short, I
found this part of my profession as barbarous and iniquitous, as my late
practice of physic; for as that was murdering of men, this was murdering of
reputations; and as reputations generally outlive the period of human life, and
the last slaughter is the greatest of the two, I was determined to wipe my
hands of it.

THERE is not a greater slavery, nor a more dependent situation in the world,
than to be in the pay of the booksellers: they in general reward an author so
ill, as to keep him always poor, and this poverty is their best security
against encroachment: for was a good writer to publish his own works, where he
gets ten pounds, he would gain a hundred. Booksellers are too timid adventurers
to risk much money on any one publication; and the misfortune is, a manuscript
never announces its success: a bookseller buys as if he never saw it; of
course, if a book succeeds, it is the bookseller, not the author, that profits
by it. Were authors to be their own publishers, and to have justice done them
by all parties concerned, they would be enabled to live well: for considerable
incomes have arisen from the sale of some works, for the copy-right of which
very small sums were originally given. Burn's Justice, a book that has brought
in thousands, was originally sold for less than five hundred pounds, Gay's
Beggar's Opera for thirty punds, and Milton's Paradise Lost for fifteen pounds.
And I have heard Sir J. F -- ld -- g say, that had his brother preserved his
copies in his own hands, the family would not have been reduced to the
difficulties they were. Great sums of money have occasionally been given for
copy-right, but his has been upon the reputaion of the author; and
nowithstanding this, far from adequate to the intrinsic value of the work.
Indeed, the booksellers are so certain of this, that when any one of the trade
fails, or retires from business, and his copy-right is to be sold, lest authors
should come at the true value of such copy-right, and know what it annually
brings in; though such property is sold by auction, the sale is always a
private one. The booksellers alone are convened, and they will sit a whole
morning brooding over the business, like a number of conspirators, darkly
meditating the destruction of an individual. And such is the jealousy and
rancour of the bookselling tribe, that they will depreciate a work in which the
trade is not concerned, and merely on that account. How does such a book sell?
says a customer, can you show me one? Oh, not at all, replies the bookseller: I
never keep any: I don't know that I have been asked for more than one since it
has been out. And you are sure to find it ill spoken of in the reviews. That
this will be the fate of mine I have not a doubt, especially after what I have
said, and having sent this history into the world, under the patronage of the
Literary Society. This is an association of literary men, who print and publish
such new and original works of authors, at their own risk and expense, as shall
be submitted to their perusal, and they shall think worth printing; give the
author all profits arising from the same, and leave him in full and free
possession of his copy-right; an institution truly patriotic and praiseworthy,
and deserving of the highest encouragement; as it must prove very beneficial to
the interest of a useful set of men, and tend to the promotion of literature.
See a fuller account of this plan at the end of this volume.
But let him, or any other bookseller with whom he is connected, be concerned
in the copy, and he will put it into the hands of every one, with Have you seen
this, Sir? It is a book in great estimation, and sells rapidly. Then again, by
way of deception, though they print but five hundred copies, the title page
shall be altered five times in such an edition, the second hundred having the
words second edition in the title, of the third hundred the third edition, and
so on: so that the third edition of a book shall be advertised and selling,
before a sufficient number are sold to pay even paper or print. I blessed
myself that I discovered these artifices early enough to put many hundreds of
pounds in my pocket; for having no man midwife to bring my bantlings into the
world, they were not strangled in the birth. Indeed they have been obliged to
live by their own little merit, a prohibition being laid by the proprietors of
the reviews, on those who write for them, not to say a single word in the
favor of any thing they know to be mine, but to handle it as severely as they
can. I have this satisfaction, however, to think, that whatever little
reputation I may have acquired, they cannot diminish it: or even, if they
could, they cannot hinder me from being easy under their attacks.
