I WENT on successfully as an author, and found that the profession, under the
circumstances I have mentioned, enabled me to live, and cut a much better
figure than I expected; but had I been poor, I should not have repined, the
poverty of a man of letters being a proof only, that he never prostituted
either his person or his pen. I fell into the hands of a very respectable
bookseller, a man who had pride and spirit above the rest of the trade, and who
scorned to be guilty of a mean or narrow action. This man did justice to every
work I put into his hands, settled his account very regularly, and paid his
balances punctually. I did so well that I took a house before I had been
twelve months married, and appeared in a style that would not have disgraced
any of my father's family. My Eliza blessed me with a son, and we were as happy
as matrimony, reciprocal affection, and good circumstances could render us. We
made several applications to Mr. Wildman, who was so exasperated at the conduct
of his daughter, that he would attend to none of them, and I was under the
necessity of proceeding against him in law, to recover the three hundred a year
that became the property of my wife on the death of her mother. Many terms
elapsed before I could bring the matter to a final hearing. I at first fell
into the hands of one of those attorneys who know how to handle a client to the
best advantage. Notwithstanding all my caution, I was not aware of the injury
they could do me; I little expected, they ever carried matters to such lengths,
as to take money of the opposite party, and betray their employers; but I now
found myself mistaken, for I discovered when the cause was at issue, that my
attorney had given notice of trial, that he had been bought over on the other
side, and had omitted to attend: the consequence was a nonsuit and I was served
with an execution for a non pros; that is, for not prosecuting the matter to a
hearing. Attorneys are liable to be struck off the roll for this conduct, and I
was very well disposed to make an example of mine; but, a friend dissuaded me
from it with the following argument: If you move the Court of King's Bench
against him, it must be on affidavit, and I should not wonder if such a rascal
was to suborn witnesses to prove you perjured, and set you in the pillory. Most
attorneys will delay a suit, in order to put a few term and other fees into
their pockets; and, when the solicitor has done, the barrister takes it up. In
this cause of mine as the lawyers found that money was not wanting on either
side, they took care to make the most of the business. Many frivolous pretenses
are often urged to delay the hearing; but I could never suppose, that when the
cause is once called on, that any measures are pursued to put off the trial:
but I was now convinced to the contrary, for, as I have observed, when the
attorneys have done, the counsel begin; they will move under various pretexts
to defer its coming on from day to day, purposely that the barristers retained
may have fresh retaining fees; for every adjournment of a cause puts fresh sums
into the pockets of the pleaders; and this custom meets with too much
countenance from above, so that when the witnesses are all ready and every
thing prepared, the hearing shall be unexpectedly adjourned. Such is the
glorious uncertainty of the law! -- Why are the lawyers always dressed in
black? says a countryman. Out of respect to their clients, whose heirs they
are. However, my next attorney was exceedingly industrious, and to do him
justice, so ready to serve my cause, that he once asked me at parting, who was
to find the witnesses, he or I? -- A decree was at last obtained in my favor,
and I was put into possession of the estate.

WE were now as happy as hearts could wish, and being at the receipt of about
eight hundred pounds a year, we envied not others as many thousands. But, in
the career of all this felicity, an accident happened that for a while blasted
the whole. My poor Eliza, coming home one evening from the opera, caught cold:
the consequence was a putrid fever, that, in spite of every medical assistance,
took her off in the every bloom of her youth; and it is but justice to her
memory, that I should say, she died as she lived, the pride of innocence and of
virtue. Her last words to me were, My dear Edward, after consigning to you the
care of my infant boy, I have but one request to make. Imprudent as my father
may think I have acted, I presume, he will feel my loss. Unkindly as he may
have acted by me, he is still my father, and, for my sake, let no unguarded
action of yours add to his distress. A few months afterward, the small pox
bereaved me of my son; and this second stroke of affliction, following quick
upon the heels of the first, quite unmanned me; it was a considerable time
before I recovered my former spirits, I thought of nothing, but going down into
the grave, mourning; but Providence has so wisely tempered our frames, that the
impression, which the deepest calamity leaves upon the mind, will, wear away
like other sublunary things. My Eliza had been the boast of my life and the
admiration of all her acquaintance, and I mourned for her, not as the
generality of the world mourns, but truly and sincerely. Mourning for the dead
is now become a farce, and there is no appearance of sorrow in the surviving
relations, but in the coat they wear. Many an heir has put on his weepers with
as much glee, as a birthday embroidery; and many a widow takes more pride in
her weeds, than in her bridal clothes. On the death of a nobleman whom I knew,
his lady, from an opinion that the melancholy event would affect her son, even
more than it had herself, (he having been bred up under the same roof, and
experienced from his father the height of parental fondness) prevailed upon a
friend, a man of address, to wait on him and break it to him, in the tenderest
manner he could. This gentleman having taken some pains to open the business,
so as to arm him for the doleful news, concluded with observing, that as it was
absurd to conceal the truth from him, since his good sense would reconcile him
to the event; he must tell him, that his father had paid the debt of nature and
was dead. The young man, at the sound of the last word, started back and stared
him in the face; then repeating the world dead emphatically; he paused -- and
whilst his friend was in pain, conceiving he had told his story too abruptly,
the young man put him at his ease, and, with a toss of the chin, made up his
own mind upon the occasion, with the following declaration. -- I Will have a
black chariot: -- my greys will look sweetly in it.

As a literary man, I was invited to the houses of many very respectable
personages; but, proud as I might be of the honor, I met with little there but
mortification. I was placed at the lower end of the table; helped to an
ordinary part; not attended to, perhaps, when I spoke; requested occasionally
to rise and ring the bell; not suffered to cut in at the whist table, and such
other slights. As I considered myself, if not of equal rank in life with the
rest of the company, yet, as having more knowledge, and more abilities, and of
course equally entitled to respect, I must own it hurt me; but why, if I
disliked it, did I go into the way of it? Because, I thought to benefit by
their acquaintance. Indeed, I frequently reconciled this behavior to me, by
saying to myself, these men do not in reality despise me. It is my fortune they
contemn; and they are not so much in the wrong, for it is certainly a small
one. -- I determined, therefore, to put up with the indignity, but made use of
them in my turn. I never refused any thing they were disposed to present me,
and took every advantage their situation threw in my way.

I THINK, for the honor of our nobility, it should be known, that whilst one
is engaged at a cricket-match, sacrificing the welfare of the state to the bat
and the wicket, another shall be boxing with post-boys and postillions, and
another running a race with a chimney-sweeper up a chimney, the devil within,
the peer without; but, he who ran within, beat the other hollow; for he was
hooping sweep at the top, before his lordship was half way up. They talk of the
dignity of the peerage; time was when an English Baron was the most respectable
character in the world; but the dignity of the modern peerage consists in being
a disgrace to manhood.

I WAS one day asked to dine with the Marquis of G. who had a principal office
in administration. He was a person whom I knew only by character; but that
character did him honor, and made me anxious to be known to him. He was a
nobleman, who, though conscious of his own dignity and careful never to commit
himself, put every one at their ease about him and never attempted to raise his
own consequence, by lessening that of another: he never set his chaplain at a
side table, or trod upon his toes to silence him in a conversation; nor ever
asked a dependant to rise from dinner to ring the bell, or let in his dog; but,
as his situation in life required him occasionally to mix with men of inferior
rank, he was industriously attentive to such men, lest they might fell
themselves wounded, at any seeming neglect. -- It is wonderful to reflect on
the ignorance of those brought up in high life! To know a great deal of the
world, is a phrase they affect, whereas to real worldly knowledge they are
utter strangers. The most sensible among them are ignorant of every thing
beyond their line of life, and they owe their ignorance to their pride. Were
they open to information, they have frequent opportunities of being very well
informed. If there be any thing to be envied in rank, it is, that their
situation enables them to have men of learning and knowledge frequently at
their tables, but, when they are so blessed, from a mistaken notion of
elevation, they shut their eyes and ears to that information they might
otherwise acquire.

THE Marquis coveted my acquaintance, I believe, from an opinion, that I might
be useful to him with my pen. As soon as decency permitted me to go abroad, I
waited on him, and when my name was announced, he very politely met me at the
foot of his stairs; told me how greatly flattered he was with my visit; the
principal object of which was to request my opinion of a paper he delivered to
me sealed up, and which he begged me to put in my pocket till my return home,
as he had some company above to whom he meant to introduce me. These were
several gentlemen of his acquaintance, whom he also invited to dinner. Among
them, to my surprise and mortification, was Lord B. the person from whose hands
I had escaped, when I left Mr. Wildman's. His father was dead, and he was now
the Earl of S. I presently knew him, but he remembered nothing of me: nor,
having changed my name, did any circumstance lead to a discovery. But, as fate
would have it, during the afternoon, in the hour of hilarity, talking of their
amors; the Marquis of G. rallying Lord S. observed in good nature, that he had
little reason to boast of predilections, for to him they had nearly been
attended with bad consequences. Was that fellow, says the Marquis, whom you
waylaid in Berkley-Square, never heard of afterward? No, replied his lordship,
smiling, the rascal, I dare say, has been hanged at some country assizes long
before this. How the devil so fine a girl as Miss Wildman could countenance the
advances of so low and ignorant a scoundrel, to me is astonishing. I observed,
that the ladies in general, being made of finer materials than our sex, were
blessed with a peculiar discernment, and could discover beauties and
perfections in man, much readier than we could; at least, we must leave them at
liberty to know what they themselves best like. Yes, Sir, returns Lord S. but,
this fellow was a servant of her father's, and one of the most low-bred
scoundrels in the world. -- You are unacquinted with the story, Sir, and
therefore cannot decide upon the merits of it. I told his lordship, that the
affair was a very public one and within my recollection; that I knew some of
the parties, and that he was more indebted to that low bred fellow's
forgiveness, for his impunity, than to any justification of the steps he took.
You seem to take this business up, Sir, replies Lord S. warmly, in a very
ungentleman-like manner, and very unbecoming the situation in which you were
introduced here. The Marquis would have interfered, but I requested to be heard
upon the occasion. I am not insensible, says I, addressing myself to Lord S. of
the honor Lord G. has done me, by inviting me to his house, and I beg his
lordship's pardon, for any thing that may have escaped me to trouble the
harmony of the afternoon; but, I flatter myself, he would not wish to consider
me in a situation below that of a gentleman, and as a proper acquaintance for
himself. I cannot boast of titulary honors; but, in point of family,
education, and abilities, I am second but to few. All gentlemen are upon an
equality; so far, my lord, I am your equal, and will submit to no indignity. At
this, he rose and walked about the room in heat, muttering the words, fellow --
impertinence, impudence. -- One of the company requested me, apart, to retire a
few minutes, till Lord S's heat had subsided. This I totally objected to,
declaring, I had more reason to be displeased than his lordship; that if he
knew me, I was persuaded he would not dare to look in my face; that I was the
very man, that his unguarded tongue had traduced; that I gloried in being that
very rascal and scoundrel his lordship had thought proper to calumniate; that I
was nearly allied to the Wilbrahams of Nottinghamshire; that I was in the
entail of that estate; that I had married Miss Wildman, though Providence has
been pleased since to take her from me; and that at the present moment, I
enjoyed part of the family estate: in a word, that though fate once had frowned
on me and I had worn a livery, I was born and bred a gentleman, and was as
independent as any man living; that the language his lordship held out to me,
was such as could not be put up with, and that he would find I should resent it
warmly. Thunderstruck at this account, the company knew not how to act; but, I
soon left them to themselves, for, approaching the Marquis of G. I told him how
unhappy the event of that day had made me, not on my own account, but his,
having been the unwilling cause of troubling the quiet of his lordship's house:
that for the present I would take my leave; thanked him for the good opinion he
had been pleased to entertain of me, and trusted my conduct in life was, and
would be such, as to leave him no room to after it.

ON my return home, I broke open the cover, that contained the paper his
lordship had given me, and found it to be a grant from the crown, of a pension
of three hundred pounds a year, with a warrant to receive a quarter's pay in
advance.

THE next morning, I called upon a particular friend of mine, with whom I had
lately made an acquaintance, told him the event of yesterday, and how
determined I was to punish Lord S. for the insult offered, not so much to
myself, for that, as he did not know me, I could overlook, nor through revenge
at the mode he took to get rid of his hated rival, for as such he understood
me; but for the indignity, treachery and violence he had offered to my late
wife, when Miss Wildman, and whose memory I revered beyond every thing. I
importuned this friend to wait on Lord S. from me, and to request he would meet
me the next morning at six, at the ring in Hyde Park, in order to give me that
satisfaction the injuries he had done me, entitled me to ask.

MY friend saw him, and his lordship's answer was, he must first know me to be
a gentleman, before he should attend to any call of mine upon such a subject. I
sent him word, that he need only advise with the Marquis of G. upon the
occasion, and I would abide by his determination. The result of which was, on
my friend's seeing him again, that he would certainly meet me at the time and
place appointed.

I ADJUSTED very thing I thought necessary to arrange, and was with my friend
upon the ground, half an hour before the time. Lord S. kept his appointment
punctually, and soon after me appeared with his friend; the etiquette on these
occasions being settled, we discharged a brace of pistols at each other, but
without effect. Our friends then interfered, and would have had the matter
terminate; but as I did not come there to make a parade of any boasted heroism,
but to bring my enemy to a sense of the injury he had done Miss Wildman, I
insisted upon his drawing his sword; which was immediately complied with, and
he attacked me with all the fury of revenge; but I being something cooler, and
master of the weapon, parried his thrusts with temper; after a few passes,
wounded him in the sword arm, and, as I had done on a former occasion, disarmed
him. Finding himself thus in my power, he acknowledged his error, apologized
for his warmth at the Marquis of G.'s, and said, had he known so much of me
then, as he did now, he should not have acted as he had; that his temper
frequently betrayed him into steps, he afterward repented of, and this was one
of them; that fortune had now thrown him into my hands, and he was at my mercy,
and if nothing but his life could atone for his rashness, I might take it. My
lord, replied I, I must again repeat, that I came not here with any
blood-thirsty view; it is not your life I seek; had I been so disposed, I could
have taken it at several moments within these ten minutes past. I aim only to
redress the wrong done to the memory of an injured lady, one whom your
ungovernable phrenzy would have sacrificed to a lawless passion; but as she had
a soul above revenge, I undertaken to give you back your forfeited life, a life
you now owe to the love I bore that best of women. He acknowledged the force of
all I said, and I believe we parted in better temper with each other, than when
we met.

NOTHING can show a greater want of sense; nothing betrays a man into more
embarrassments, than being to free of speech in public company. We know not
whom we talk before, nor how far the persons we speak to, are interested in
what we say. An unguarded tongue has frequently cost me an unhappy hour; it had
nearly cost Lord S. his life.

THOUGH I was hurried by the respect I bore the memory of my Eliza into this
act, and it ended without any fatal consequences, I cannot but condemn the too
general practice of duelling upon the slightest occasions. There is such an
inconsistent etiquette in these affairs of honor, that nothing but the
absurdest custom can justify. A man will, by his conduct and declarations,
pride himself in being a rascal, and if any one should presume to subscribe to
the character he is pleased to give himself, he calls him out, determining, as
his most humble servant, to cut this man's throat as soon as possible. And
though such persons meet the greatest enemies, and endeavor to rob each other
of life, a few minutes shall make them the best friends in the world. If there
be any argument in its favor, it is that of keeping gentlemen within the
bounds of civility to each other; but when we consider how far it is often
strained, it is to be lamented, that some powerful means are not taken to
abolish it. The gentlemen of Ireland are very capricious in this respect; I
admire their feelings, but I condemn their rashness. The following story will
explain my ideas.

A YOUNG gentleman of my acquaintance, heir to an estate in Ireland, found it
necessary to go over to take possession of it; but, setting, perhaps, a greater
value upon his life than it deserved, and knowing the hasty temper of the
Irish, and his own feelings as a man, he dreaded the thoughts of venturing into
a country, where he conceived it almost next to an impossibility of coming away
again in a whole skin, till the following thought reconciled it to him. He
resolved, during the whole time he was abroad, never to go into the company of
any one who wore a sword. He was there upwards of six weeks, had engaged for
his passage on his return home, and was blessing himself the day before he was
to sail, on his prudence and discretion; but to leave Ireland, and see nothing
of the world there, would be ridiculous. Now, his notions of the world were, to
spend a few hours at a bagnio; he determined, therefore, to pass his last
evening in one of those houses, where he met with a couple of ladies, the only
two in the house, whom he proposed to entertain with a supper. Whilst this was
preparing, the waiter entered with there is a gentleman in the house, Sir,
whose name is Patrick Shilalah; he sends his compliments to your honor, and
begs you will permit him to be of your party. At this message, my friend's
prudence took the alarm, and he returned the following, make my compliments to
the gentleman, and tell him, as I have not the honor to be known to him, and
as my stay here will be very short, I hope he will excuse me. The waiter soon
returned, with Mr. Patrick Shilalah's compliments, and if you will not admit of
his company, he begs he may have one of the ladies. Do, my dear Jenny, says my
friend to one of the girls, do -- pray -- go to the gentleman. She accordingly
went, but the waiter was again dispatched, with the gentleman's compliments,
and begs the other lady, for he did not like the one he had. Vexed and
disappointed, and not thinking either of the girls worth fighting for, he
prevailed on the other to go also, and in the height of this mortification
called for the supper, when the waiter told him, it was carried in to Mr.
Patrick Shilalah and the ladies. Irritated beyond measure at this treatment, he
at first meditated revenge; but on cooler consideration, as he was not known,
was going for England in the morning, and should probably never be in Ireland
again, he deemed it best to pocket the affront, and make the best of his way
home to his lodgings; where he had scarcely got into bed, but a loud knock was
heard at the door, and soon after, his servant came into his room with, there
is a gentleman below, Sir, who calls himself Patrick Shilalah, and says, that
being conscious he has not treated you as he should have done, is come to offer
you gentleman's satisfactions. Good God! Thomas, replied my friend, make my
compliments to the gentleman, tell him, I am in bed or I would wait on him, and
that I am not the least offended with any part of his conduct, being rather
happy it was in my power to contribute to his amusements. This sent Mr. Patrick
Shilalah off, and my friend, unwilling to trust himself an hour longer on Irish
ground, hasted on board the packet, and waited there till it sailed.
