BEING now in some repute as an author, I had a visit from the clergyman whom I
have spoken of before in the Sixth Chapter, as a Nealogist. A speaker of new
words.
He introduced himself to me, by saying, that he should have thought himself
unpardonable, had he omitted to salutate Pay his respects to.
a gentleman to whom erudites Men of erudition.
were so much indebted. He appeared to me to be an outree character, and as
such I cherished his acquaintance. He observed to me, that the literati were
obliged to him for a variety of new-coined words, which he intended to present
to the proprietors of dictionaries, and in this, he flattered himself, he
should be of more real service to the age, than all the lexicographers and
writers who had gone before him; that circumlocution was not only expensive to
the breath, but tiresome to the ear; that the beauty of diction consisted in
its being full and nervous, and that the shorter a sentence, the more perfect
it was, and the less attention it required; that pleonasm might be a figure in
rhetoric, but it was the rhetoric of former ages, when a man was esteemed for
his super abundity Supera bundance.
of words; but now, says he, the less a man says, the more he is supposed to
think; and a cogitator A thinking man.
is always considered as an intelligent. A man of understanding.
This was all said with that volubility of tongue, and rapidity of utterance,
as scarce to admit of his taking breath, much less of leaving me an opportunity
to reply. He next proceeded to tell me, that he had an universal acquaintance
in the literary world; that he corresponded with every author of reputation,
both abroad and at home, and had the first intelligence and copy of every
publication, either printed, or designed for the press. He told me he was going
to pay a visit to his friend Dr. Pomposo, a very extraordinary character, but a
great erudite, and asked me to accompany him. Wishing to be acquainted with men
of learning, I accepted his invitation, and cheerfully went with him.

As we were walking to this man's house, he informed me that Dr. Pomposo was a
warm friend to writers of this country, but would not admit that real learning
had ever extended beyond it. Nay, says he, his predilection for England so
abducts Carries him so far.
him, that he avers they are all blockheads on the other side the Tweed. He
told me, that when Abernethy first published those sermons which were not known
to be his, by any upography Name subscribed.
in the title page, ("except by me," says he, with a kind of triumphant nod,
"and I was silent,") they fell in Pomposo's way. Enraptured with the arguments,
and ravished with the diction, he carried a volume always in his pocket, and
introduced it every where as the standard of correct language. But
unfortunately the second edition appeared with the author's name affixed. The
volume was no longer circumgested Carried about him.
; he forgot, or wished to forget, both the sermons and their author. It
happened, however, one day, that one of his necessarii, Intimate friends.
who spoke always from Pomposo's mouth, had been depredicating Crying up.
in company Abernethy's language, and requested from the Doctor a sight of the
volume, to verify his assertions. He replied that he had never seen Abernethy's
sermons. What! retorts his friend, not that Abernethy whose language you extol
as a model of perfection? Perfection! returns he angrily; I never knew a
Scotchman yet, that could write a line of grammar.

WHEN we reached Pomposo's house, I was introduced to him as one of the
literati, whom he must superbiate, Be proud.
to receive. He never moved from his chair, but (which was in him a great mark
of condescension) disired me to be seated. He had several persons with him, who
seemed to have been writing, for each had a pocket book and pencil in his hand.
Pomposo was very near sighted, and being bent with age, his head hung down so
much, that his chin rested upon his bosom; of course he could see nothing right
before him. This happened to be his levee day, and is apartment was crowded. On
our being seated among the rest, he grumbled forth that the literati of the
present times were but few; that the era of learning had long gone by, and
that latter pretenders to it, were but quacks in the republic of letters; that
literature had been poisoned by the modern dispensers of words; and that
without speedy correction and illumination in science, we should fall back into
the barbarisms of the darker ages. Scarce did he utter a word, but every one in
the room, except ourselves, had his pencil to his paper, and was copying from
his mouth, as if he had been an oracle. The persons present, I found, were a
parcel of scribblers, who, by adulation and praise, were admitted to visit him,
and who, by starting different topics, generally brought away with them a much
greater store of ideas than they carried there. It was a scene that entertained
me for the moment, but which I never cared to renew.

ON my observing to my new acquaintance, that, though education generally
polished the manners of the world, it seemed, with respect to him, to have lost
its influence, for that he appeared to me to be quite a cynic, and a Hottentot,
he admitted my observation to be just. With all his learning and his knowledge,
says he, he is a bear in his manners, and looks down with an affected pity on
men, who have little else than their rank or their fortune to distinguish them.
The man of science, will he often say, is a kind of intellectual being, whom
the Creator has thought proper to illighten with some rays of his divinity, and
in the scale of humanity is truly great; whereas he who is distinguished only
from the crowd by a title, is scarce more than a contemptible reptile, who
envying the super-eminence of his fellow creature, sues to his prince for that
little trifling honor, which self-created dignity has to bestow upon a
parasite; and when bestowed, affords the person on whom it is conferred, as
little reason to boast, as a favorite spaniel has, in the appellation of the
high-sounding names of Caesar or Pompey. So far is he from being a respecter of
persons, that he will despise and deride even those who serve him.

DR. Pomposo was formerly a political writer, violent against the ministry; and
as he wrote with a keenness and severity, that would have placed some men in
the pillory; to stop his mouth, the minister, who was a Scotchman, thought
proper to pension him: but this did not abate his animosity to the Scottish
nation, to which he was an avowed enemy. A friend of his has since told me,
that he accompanied him once to receive his pension. Our conversation, says he,
all the way, was on the iniquity of employing Scotchmen in affairs of state;
and Pomposo was so warm upon the subject, that he kept it up all the way we
went; nay, he continued it even whilst he was counting his money. One, -- two,
-- five, -- ten, -- twenty. -- The North Briton, A violent paper against
administration.
says he, has been, however, of some use: -- Twenty-five, -- twenty-eight; --
it has turned one d -- mn'd Scotchman out of place: (this was the man that
pensioned him) -- Thirty, -- thirty-five, -- forty, -- forty-five. -- These
rascals, I fear, will be the ruin of this country at last. And at this rate did
he proceed, railing at, and abusing the people, to whom he was most indebted.
He had once been in the pay of the booksellers, but being a single man, whose
wants were but few, he soon determined that a hireling writer is at best but a
prostitute, and when they would employ him no longer, he dropped the profession.

THE Marquis of G. called on me a few mornings after, and said the whole town
rung with my commendation. He had a friend of his, he said, who wished to be
acquainted with me, and if agreeable to me, he would attend me there to dinner.
I accepted the invitation, and accompanied him. This new acquaintance is a man
(Lord W.) who, from making a great noise in the house of commons, has been
lately created and Irish baron. He has to boast of great moral virtue and good
parts, but as much confined in worldly knowledge, as is his walk in the broad
way of life. He is master of etiquette, and the doctrine of courts no one knows
better; but so dim-sighted is he in other respects, that he can see nothing
beyond the blaze of majesty. Owing his elevation in life, more to chance than
family or connexions, and having but a circumscribed fortune, he has little or
no dignity, but what he owes to the favor of his prince; of course, the little
rank he has, is the only thing on which he hangs, or depends for respect: and
lest any one about him should lose sight of that rank, he is always talking of
it, bringing it forward, and blazoning it abroad, and will not fail to tell you
how gracious the king was on the last levee day. He affects to be a great man,
and believes himself to be so, but it is only as far as mimickry makes him.
Thus, he puts me in mind of a poor gentleman, descended from one of the kings
of Ireland, and who, wrapped up in his family pride, has retired into an obscure
part of that country, with a patrimony of four score pounds a year, and who,
amid wretchedness and beggary, is served upon the knee, and never receives any
one, but he offers him his hand to kiss. Indeed, the pride of the Irish is
insufferable. The sons of a gentleman are all bred up in that style, though the
father's estate is so small, as not to admit of his giving them a shilling:
hence they come over to England, and commence fortune-hunters. I once knew a
baronet's widow who had two sons; the eldest took the family estate, about
eight hundred pounds a year, but was obliged to pay his brother one thousand
pounds on his mother's death, who had, during her life, a jointure of two
hundred pounds a year out of this estate. An English gentleman of her
acquaintance, who had formerly been in business, advised her ladyship to put
this younger son into trade, and settle him in England; but her family pride
stood in her way, and she could not bring herself to think of it. Some time,
however, afterward, she altered her mind; and as the provision made for her
younger son was so very small, and she had not interest to get him any proper
appointment, she brought him to England, and applied to her friend who before
advised the measure. I begin now to think, Mr. Wiseman, says she, that the
English are a better kind of people than represented, and that trade is not so
despicable as I once conceived; of course, shall have no objections to my son's
living among them, and entering into some commercial connexions. If you can
meet with any respectable place, and fix him in some genteel business, that he
can follow without discredit, I shall think myself obliged to you. This
gentleman, as a friend to the family, interested himself in the matter, and
took some pains to find out a house, where, when the young gentleman had served
his time, he might be received as a partner, and be likely, in a few years, to
get a good fortune; and having found such a place, he flew with alacrity to the
lady, and told her, in the warmth of his heart, how fortunate he had been. As I
knew you was our friend, says her ladyship, I conceived you the best person in
the world to apply to in the business. Pray, Mr. Wiseman, what is the
profession? A biscuit-baker, Ma'am, says he. Panic-struck at the word,
Biscuit-baker! she cried out: Would you make Sir Harry Lofty's son a
biscuit-baker! Why indeed, Madam, returns Mr. Wiseman, piqued at her folly, I
have rather mistaken the matter here; I did not properly consider it. I was
very sure you had not, replies the lady, softening her voice, or a
biscuit-baker could have never entered into your thoughts. Your ladyship is
perfectly right, says her friend: Had I thought well upon the subject, I never
should have proposed it; for on further consideration, was the whole family
estate to be realized, and converted into money, it would not be sufficient to
set him up in business. -- But to return to my narrave. If at any time Lord W.
is familiar with an inferior, it is when he 6 is not seen. The man he thinks
proper to receive when in the country, and pretends there to love and esteem,
he will be out of countenance at in public; he will shun him when in London,
and scarce honor him with a nod, if in company with men of rank. He will visit
none in his neighborhood that are not titled; and at times, is afaird to stoop
his head to a tenant, for fear of committing himself. He will know no man that
is not generally known, will follow nothing but inconstancy, admire nothing but
beauty, and honor nothing but fortune. Though he is affectedly attentive to
those below him, when they fall in his way, and the eye of the world is not
upon him; yet he draws back when they are addressing him, as if contamination
was in their breath, and is all gooseskin at a low bred man. He dares not
salute a man in old clothes, or unfashionably dressed; and will go so far as to
confess vices he is a stranger to, provided those vices are in fashion. He is
seen at every public place of genteel resort; attends the theater without an
eye, and the opera-house without an ear.

To enter further into his character; he is servile to those above him, and
overbearing to those below him. Before the learned he is dumb, and before the
ignorant, loquacious and positive. He neither eats nor drinks like other men.
All his hens are poulards; his cocks, capons; his farm-yard ducks, Rouen; all
his sherry is Xeres; all his Champaigne, Sillery; and his park you may fire
across in almost every direction. If you will believe him, he gives a great
price for every thing he purchases; his butler is his valet; his coachman, his
steward; and his huntsman, his game-keeper; and yet he distinguishes them
according to the offices they are employed in. He talks of his steward to his
tenants, and his game-keeper to the neighboring farmers. In short, he is all
vanity and parade; and, instead of giving consequence to his situation, by any
dignity in himself, like all novi homines, or upstart gentlemen, he is forced
to derive all his consequence from it.

AT this nobleman's house, I think I met with, next to himself, the most
singular character in life. A man in whom the two opposite extremes of peace
and war were united. He was a clergyman and at the same time a soldier; miles
atque sacerdos, and went by the name Brigadier Moses. He was dressed in a short
black silk cassock, with a regimental coat over it, scarlet turned up with
black and laced with gold. Instead of the black sash or circingle which the
clergy wear round their waist, he had a red sash, and above the gorget he wore
upon his breast, was a clerical band. He had on his head, a brigadier wig with
two tails; a smart cocked gold-laced hat, with a cockade; a couteau de chasse
by his side, and a pair of square toed shoes upon his feet. He was a dignitary
of the church in Ireland, but had accepted the command of a regiment of
volunteers; and was as universally respected as admired. He employed the whole
week in teaching his men their exercise, and always preached to them on
Sundays; and when he preached, he drew his sabre and laid it on his arm, as if
reading a proclamation. One of his sermons has been handed round. -- Part of it
is as follows: Let us fight the good fight.

Fellow christians and soldiers; Behold here your pastor and leader, armed in
your defense, standing forth in your cause, as did my predecessor Moses between
his people and the wrath of the Avenger; and be not surprised at it. A virtuous
soldier is the most respectable character in life. Enlisted under the banner of
christianity, though only a private, he should take pride in wearing the
uniform of the Lord of hosts. The christian life is a life of warfare, besieged
on all sides, and beset with perils; perils of water, perils of fire, and
perils of the sword; but let us fight the good fight, and stand firm against
the assaults of the common enemy; as we cannot hope to be well received at the
general muster, but through the sword of the spirit, the shield of faith, and
the helmet of salvation, etc.

SO full was the Brigadier of his military profession, that he marched across
the room, instead of walking; and, whenever he turned, he wheeled upon his
heel. I found him a cheerful good-natured man, and took the liberty to ask him,
in the course of conversation, whether he did not find the tenets of one
profession interfere with that of the other? He told me not; that a priest was
not only to be the father of his flock, but also their leader; that the author
of our religion recommended a military life to his disciples. He that has no
sword, said he, let him sell his garment and buy one. When a strong man, armed,
keeps his palace, his goods are in peace That the church was a church
militant; that a christian was taught to gird up his loins and bind on the
sword to battle. The Irish peer supported him in what he had advanced, and
said, that his Majesty, to whom we ought to look up for propriety of conduct,
had set him the example; for, that he was not only the head of the church, but
the head of the army. As I have since the age of manhood stood up in defense of
religion, says the Brigadier, I mean now to stand up in defense of my country.
It has been said that parsons are cowards; we will now show them they have a
spirit equal to other men, and dare rise in a good cause. The Roman catholics,
who are bigots to their faith, held not the military profession incompatible
with the priesthood. Cardinal Richlieu was a soldier, and during his
administration, the French army against Spain was commanded by a Bishop. I so
warmly covet the independence of my country, that as prayers will not effect
it, I will meet my people in the field, and try what the sword can do. In
short, he was such an enthusiast in politics, that finding it was in vain to
argue with him, I endeavored to change the subject.

THE company present seemed very desirous of being of use to me. Lord W. wished
to appoint me his literator, which office was to cull out the pith of every new
publication, and retail it to him at breakfast, for he was too indolent to read
himself. The Brigadier was for my being his Aid de Camp; but for this office,
says he, you must get into orders, for all the officers under me are clerical.
My sub-dean is my lieutenant colonel; the chancellor of the diocese is my
major; the prebendaries are my captains; the subalterns are the minor canons of
the cathedral; the adjutant is our precentor, and all the non-commissioned
officers are made up of vergers, beadles, etc. As to the common rank and file,
there is nothing spiritual among them; if they deal at all in the spirit, it is
in what goes into the mouth, not what comes out of it.

BUT the Marquis, who had already presented me with a pension, gave me to
understand, that he meant to be farther useful to me. He took me aside, and
told me he had a favorite measure to carry in parliament, but as it was rather
unpopular, he wished me to take it up, and write in its favor; for, says he,
it must be a bad cause indeed, that cannot be defended. I found myself well
disposed to serve him, and promised him every assistance in my power.

DURING this visit at Lord W.'s, which, indeed, I mentioned to have an
opportunity of laying before my readers two of the most extraordinary
characters I had met with, that of Lord W. himself, and his worthy friend the
Brigadier. A letter was brought me by a porter, saying, a gentleman had called
at my house with it that afternoon and desired it might be forwarded to me
immediately. I begged leave to open it, and found it to be written by my old
friend, Mr. Slash'em, the vicar; of the parish where I was bred in Notts, and
informed me, that my father's uncle was dead, and that his estate fell to me,
as being the next on the entail; all the children of my father's elder brother
having dropped off before him. I could not refrain from communicating this
piece of news to the company I was with, and they congratulated me upon the
event. It is astonishing to reflect on the immediate consequence of a good
fortune. I found instantly a difference in their behavior. They were very
polite and respectful before, but their attention to me rather carried a
patronizing air with it; they should always be happy to know me, and receive
me; but the instant my fortune was announced, we were upon an equality; I must
come into parliament, a borough was open for me; and if I would support
government, if should not cost me but two thousand pounds; every expense beyond
that sum should be paid for me. I thanked them very kindly for their good
wishes, but begged some little time to consider of it. It is wonderful what a
great alteration in our favor a good fortune makes; it is far beyond
education, ingenuity, or brilliancy of parts. Let a man pass by, ever so meanly
clad; observe to your friend that he is supposed to be worth one hundred
thousand pounds, he stares at him again and again, and looks on him as a
prodigy. As when wealth and prosperity forsake a man, we discover in him, that
want of understanding, which was undiscoverable before; so when they shine upon
a person, we presently see perfections in him, which no one was able to find
out till then. So strange a disproportion does a little money or the want of it
make between men! Mrs. Saintly, whilst the wife of a minor canon, stole into
the cathedral unnoticed. She carried her hassock in her hand, placed it in a
corner, and could be as devout as she pleased, uninterupted; but when she
became a bishop's lady, she was conducted into the quoir by the vergers, placed
in a stall of eminence, and service did not begin till she was seated, and the
eyes of all the women were upon her. On the other hand, Squander, the once
wealthy son of Gripus, and then idolized; having lavished away all his
patrimony, is carried to the grave unattended, and unlamented.
