BY the time I had been at this place a week, I had such remittances from my
banker as I stood in need of, and had heard from home, that all things were
well. I then equipped myself with those necessaries I wanted, namely, a few
shirts and a suit of clothes, and prepared to set off once more, took a post
chaise for Nottinghamshire. Though anxious to call the Earl of S. to account
for the treatment I had received, I thought it most prudent to pay a visit to
my friend the vicar; and the reader may believe me, when I say, that I found
myself less eager to take this journey now, than I was, when I left London on
the same occasion; my expectations were balked by the event I have related, and
my spirits were not so much upon the wing; howerer, I set out and reached York
the first night.

THE theater being there open, I went to the play, and who should I meet with
in the same box, but Biddy Slash'em, dressed out with a profusion of diamonds,
in company with an old gentleman, whom I supposed to be her keeper. She was
overjoyed to see me, and introduced me to Mr. Dupe, the gentleman with her, as
the son of her father's brother, whom she had before represented as a clergyman
of the first character and fortune. He received me very cordially, and, when
the play was over, begged to have the honor of my company to supper, having a
house in the town. I accompanied them home in their carriage, and was requested
whilst I continued at York, to sleep there. This gave me an opportunity of
passing an hour or two alone with Miss Slash'em, Mr. Dupe being accustomed to
ride out every morning before breakfast, upon a hard trotting horse, for the
cure of a gouty complaint he had in his stomach. The Jew Doctor and Blacksmith
in London, having by his machine to create muscular exercise, made such a
regimen fashionable. This machine, I am told, is merely a board (on which the
patient stands, holding by an iron) with springs under it, worked by an
handwinch which raises and lowers it so quick, that in a small space of time,
it throws the person on it into a violent perspiration, and gives him all the
advantages of great exercise, without muscular exertion: a trotting horse will
answer the same purpose, if the rider can undergo the fatigue. During Mr.
Dupe's morning ride, I had the happiness of a tete-a-tete in Biddy's chamber,
and found her as attached to me as ever. I gave her some little account of my
adventures since we parted; and she in return, related to me the sequel of
here is.

WHEN you left us, my dear Gabriel, says she, at Winchester, we were preparing
to remove to the Devizes; there I continued about three weeks, when Mr. Dupe,
the gentleman I live with, seeing me in one of my principal characters in his
way from Bath to London, took a liking to me, and made me proposals to live
with him. These proving acceptable, I took leave of the company, quitted my
employ, and came away with him. He has settled two hundred pounds a year on me,
loads me with presents, and says he will marry me if I prove with child.

And you, no doubt, says I try every means you can for it. Well if ever you
are, it will be within nine months of this time. -- Being fond of music and
admiring my voice, continued she, he has procured me the best masters; and ill
as I sung at Winchester, I am now reckoned the first private singer in England.
It has been the means of introducing me into the best company; for, so
affectedly fond are persons of fashion of music, that they will sacrifice every
thing to the rage of it. The gentry in this part of the country, readily
overlook my situation, for the sake of my voice, and I visit and am visited by
every body round me. Nay, I assure you I give myself great airs upon these
occasions, and find the more box I take upon me, the more I am thought of. I
never pay a visit, till I have first received one; nor does Mr. Dupe expect me.
The Duchess of D. and the Countess of R. her sister, did us the honor to
drink tea with us yesterday. They wished me to sing, and I sung, but I obliged
them during the time I sung, to sit down upon the ground? And why so? says I,
oh! -- I always do that, continued she, in rooms not adapted for music; and
when I sing at any other houses but my own, where they have not a music room,
I insist upon the window curtains being taken down, the capet removed, and all
the company's sitting down upon the floor but myself; for nothing flattens the
sound of a voice more than drapery furniture, and a number of persons half
filling a room. And do they submit to this? replied I, Certainly they do, says
she, and they must, or I would not sing. They would half strip themselves if I
required it, rather than the world should fancy, they have not the greatest
penchant for music. I know they visit and receive me, merely for my singing,
and that though they bear with my oddities, they only laugh at me when gone;
this determines me to laugh in my turn, and as Mr. Dupe will not suffer me to
receive any persents, I am determined they shall pay for their folly one way or
other. Though I smiled at the conceit, I could not but agree with her, that of
all follies the tonish or fashionable ones, are the most absurd. I Will tell you
an anecdote, my dear Biddy, returned I, that will confirm my assertion. Among
the many people I have mixed with since I left you, is the lady of Sir Peter
Puncheon, a Creole, from Jamaica. Sir Peter had been formerly in trade, had
afterward turned planter, and acquired a good fortune. His lady being a woman
of dash and spirit, persuaded him to leave Jamaica and settle in England. They
accordingly sold all off and came, and not having a soul to introduce them into
that company she coveted, she fell upon the following plan which succeeded
beyond her expectations. Having a large house in London well situated, she
called for the red book, Commonly called the Court Calendar.
and from a list she there picked out, and other information, sent cards of
invitation to a concert and a ball, to all the rout-going men and women of
rank, to the number of some hundreds, and such was the rage for going to this
woman's house, that many who by accident were not invited made interest for a
card; so that on the evening appointed, there was such a throng of coaches and
chairs, that all the adjoining streets were full. She procured a very
intelligent servant, acquainted with their names, to announce them as they
arrived, she standing on the top of the stairs, with her husband, to receive
them. In the early part of the evening when they dropped in but thinly, she had
leisure to receive them properly; and expressed how proud she was of the honor
they did her; but in a very little time, they poured in so thick upon her, that
it required three men below to announce them, and would have required a
register to have remembered their names. It was a task beyond her reach, and
she could only introduce them to her husband in the lump, with a Baronet, my
dear; two more Lords; a Red ribband, and so on. -- From this scheme she
immediately became a woman of the ton, and her house, from that time, was the
fashionable resort of the first people in town. They admired her invention,
whilst they laughed at her impudence; but they continued to visit her
notwithstanding: for the time of persons of fashion hang so much upon their
hands, and they enjoy so little of what the rational world calls social and
domestic society, that they would run to h --, I believe, if the black
gentleman would open his house with a concert, a ball, or a card party. By this
means she was readily known and received in the great world, and very soon
procured her husband to be created a Baronet. This brought them to court, and
as people devoid of elegance, idly suppose that richness of dress depends
upon profusion, or an extra quantity of expensive attire; instead of appearing
in two laced lappets, lady Puncheon was determined to have four. It so fell
out, however, that four lappets to a head dress being contrary to etiquette,
she was refused admittance, 'till Sir Peter set the matter right, by taking out
a pair scizars and cutting off two of them. But as the two he cut off were on
one side, she became the laugh and ridicule of the whole drawing room.

BIDDY was delighted with this story and vowed she would put it in practice as
soon as she got to London. Do, says I, Biddy, and I Will be bound you will have
company enough. Character and connection is out of the question. Open your
house, and the business is done.

MR. Dupe soon after returned from his morning's ride and found us in his bed
chamber. It a little disconcerted us; but he quickly put us at our ease, with,
so, my dear Biddy, you would show your cousin my knotted bed. Shaking his head
at her, and chucking her under the chin. Ah, you little rogue, you are
determined I shall not lose any credit that you can give me. Then addressing
himself to me. I knotted the greatest part of that fringe myself, Mr.
Whatd'ye-call 'em (I cannot think of your name) and I am not ashamed to own it;
it is better than galloping a whole county over after a fox, injuring one's
tenants and running the chance of breaking one's neck. Come, Sir, walk down and
see my improvements. I thanked him for his politeness to me; but told him, I
must be going, for that, I had engagements of the first importance that called
me into Nottinghamshire. Well, Sir, says he, then I Will leave you together --
you may have some little affair to enter into, that requires privacy. I beg,
Biddy, you will show your cousin all the civility you can.

I now took my leave of Miss Slash'em, promising to see her again as soon as
she came to London.
