THE day after I parted with Miss Slash'em, I got safe to her uncle's house in
Notts, and happy I was to see him; nor did he show less happiness in seeing me.
It was now about three weeks since I left London, with a design of coming to
this place; and I think, in so short a space of time, no one met with a greater
variety of incidents. I related the story to him; but not a word of his niece.
Ah, says he, you see how kind and protecting the Almighty is; not a sparrow
falls to the ground without his observance! Lord S. is a very bad man; and I
hope you will be able to bring the matter home to him That I certainly shall,
says I; for the redress I shall look for, shall be a personal one. As a
clergyman, and a very worthy one, he made use of every argument to dissuade me
from such a step; but the injuries I had received were so great, that they had
but little weight with me. I therefore turned the subject, and enquired whether
he had received my letter. He told me he had, and by an express the day after
it was written. So far those fellows who forced me on board the vessel, acted
well. He gave me to understand, that my uncle had made a will, sometime before
he died, and had left great part of his property to my cousins; but as he
outlived them, the legacies were lapsed, and all the personals fell to me,
with the entailed estate; that he having no relations to be found, and the
executor he had appointed in his will, being also deceased, letters of
administration were granted to him at his request, and he was ready to put me
into possession immediately. I have, said he, made many enquiries, for some
years past, about you, but could het no satisfactory intelligence; however,
since the death of your uncle, I have been more industrious in this business,
and have found you out. What was necessary to be done in your absence, has been
done; such as taking an inventory of the effects, and properly securing them;
and I trust you will find every thing in as good order as circumstances
admitted. With respect to your house in town, I wrote to your housekeeper, as
you desired; directed her to put the servants upon board wages, and when she
wanted any money, to apply to a friend of mine in London, whom I commissioned
to supply her.

AFTER thanking the vicar for his care, and the trouble he had taken, we went
together to the mansion, when he gave me possession of all the keys. In my
uncle's cabinet I found near five hundred pounds in bank notes and cash, and a
memorandum, saying that he had twelve thousand pounds in the funds, and in what
funds they lay. Having adjusted every thing for the present, visited the
tenants, and left proper persons in the house, I presented Mr. Slash'em with a
bank note of two hundred pounds, for the trouble I had given him, which he
modestly refused; but which I insisted on his receiving, and further promised,
that if it was ever in my power to be of use to him, I should neither forget
it, nor omit it.

BEFORE I left his house, he was very anxious to know how I had disposed of
myself since I left his part of the world; and considering him as my friend, I
gave him a minute detail of every thing, except such parts as related to his
niece, who, I found, had been entirely discarded by the family. His brother,
the doctor, was, I learned, still at Hampstead, and doing very well.

THE Vicar was wonderfully entertained with my history, but disapproved much of
some part of my conduct. However, he presumed I had seen my error, and as now I
was possessed of a good fortune, he flattered himself, I should live a more
regular life. This history of yourself, says he, convinces me, that nothing is
like giving a lad a good education; this will stick by him when every thing
else fails; enable him to surmount every difficulty, and carry him through life
in spite of all opposition.

UPON examining the rental of my uncle's estate, I found it amount to a good
four thousand three hundred pounds a year; which, with the interest of twelve
thousand pounds in the stocks, the three hundred pounds a year I enjoyed from
my wife, and my pension, etc. I had an income equal to near five thousand four
hundred pounds a year.

I NOW set off for London, which I reached the next morning, and on my arrival
at my own house, found every thing as I wished it. My servants, poor souls,
were as glad to see me, as I was to see them. I told them how I had been
trepanned, but not by whom; and that it was a chance of the highest
improbability, that ever they saw me again. They said, the town was very silent
then on the subject, for they had heard nothing of it before. As to the lad
that accompanied me to Finchly, I suppose they sent him aboard a man of war,
for I never heard of him afterward.

THE first visit I paid was to the Marquis of G. who received me very friendly,
and to whom I related my story, and that I meant to call Lord S. to a very
severe account for his behavior. His answer was, That business is already
settled; Lord S. has done it himself. I requested an explanation. He told me,
that I was no sooner seized, but that Lord S. called upon him, and boasted of
what he had done; said he had you stopped under a fictitious warrant, and had
transported you to Shetland; for that after disarming him, as you had done, in
the affair in Hyde Park, he could never brook the idea of owing his life to
you, and of course, could never bear to see you again; and that news arriving
of the vessel being cast away, and the crew saved, he dreaded your return to
town, and had accordingly put an end to his existence with a pistol. The
matter, continued he, as he is not missed, is not much talked of: it were
better, therefore, to let it sleep, as reviving it will be of no use to you,
and may hurt the feelings of his family; who, notwithstanding the faults of
Lord S. is a very respectable one. As to his agents in this business, they are
wretches below your notice, could not possibly owe you any ill will, being
villains that would be as ready, for a little money, to do as much for you as
for him.

HIS lordship's arguments had their due weight with me, and I determined to
follow his advice. Though I execrated the conduct of Lord S. I dropped a tear
at his fatal exit, and there the matter ended. How trifling a character is that
of a man of fashion, and how convinced must a person be, that he is a useless
being in life, when he considers that at his death, he leaves a world that will
not miss him!

THE marquis, among other things, told me, his Majesty had appointed him prime
minister, and of all things, he should be happy if I would accept the
secretaryship to the Treasury; that he was well acquainted with my abilities,
and knew I should fill the office well; that he would open a borough for me,
and I should be returned without trouble. I thanked his lordship for the honor
he did me, and told him, that as I now stood single in life, and had no
domestic concerns to take off my attention, I would accept the office
cheerfully. Accordingly, I was soon after appointed, and returned for a
ministerial borough: and the first satisfaction I derived from this employ, was
having it in my power to do a handsome thing by my friend the Vicar. The
marquis told me, about six months after I had been in office, that a rectory in
the gift of the crown, and in the neighborhood of my estate in
Nottinghamshire, of the yearly valuel of six hundred pounds a year and upwards,
with a good house upon it, had fallen vacant, and that if I had any friend in
that part of the world, whom I wished to serve, it should be at my disposal. I
readily embraced the offer, thanked him for his politeness, and gave it to Mr.
Slash'em, it being within distance, and tenable with the church he then held.
This was the first good office of any magnitude, that I had ever in my power to
perform; and if it be not vanity to say it, I will own, that it gave me a
secret pleasure, and one so great, that I pined for an opportunity of doing a
second. I am persuaded, that those who do good, will believe the truth of this
assertion, and think there is more real gratification in giving than receiving.
With a heart warmed by love and gratitude, my friend Slash'em waited on me to
express his acknowledgements for the service I had done him, and I felt at the
moment all the self-complacency, which a favor cheerfully and unexpectedly
bestowed, and thankfully received, communicates to the feeling heart of the
donor.
