WAS I to describe to my readers the arduous task of the office I filled, I am
persuaded none of them would envy my situation. Besides my official business at
the Treasury, though I was said to be the right hand of the minister, I was
absolutely his slave: I was expected to support in the House of Commons all he
did, or wished to do, without any concurrence of my own, and at times, when
alone, was obliged, like a mercenary barrister, to study for arguments to throw
out in the House, in defense of measures I disapproved, and which I inwardly
condemned. My colleagues in office, the marquis would sometimes smile and say,
were not up to the task, and that administration could not do without me. To a
good pair of lungs, Nature had bestowed upon me a powerful harmonious voice,
and blessed me with a strong memory beyond what men in general can boast of: as
these are natural talents, I may mention them without vanity, and if I did not
turn them to the best of purposes, it was that I had accepted an office, I
could not, for certain reasons, immediately relinquish; and it fell to the
holder of that office to support the conduct of his employer; and, as there is
always an opposition in Parliament, and I hope, for the good of this country
there ever will, be the motives of that opposition what they may, it is
necessary for men in office, if they wish to carry their point, to labor to
overthrow those arguments that are brought against them; sometimes these
arguments are strong ones, and require a great deal of fallacious reasoning to
combat; but whether a cause be right or wrong, the partisans of opposition will
cavil at it, and it is the business of administration to show the absurdity of
such cavilling. So little regard is paid to the abilities of representatives,
that the major part of them are very weak men, and are led away by the last
speaker; it is necessary, therefore, if possible, that men in office should
have the last word, and this is what I always contended for. I was the only one
in administration, they said, that had temper and constitution enough to bear
badgering, and believe me I had enough of it. The marquis was a man that meant
well, and was not without his share of understanding; but he could not always
carry things his own way: he was brought into the office he held, by the party
with whom he was connected, and on that account was obliged frequently to give
up his opinion to their's; but as he was the ostensible person, it was my
business, if possible, to establish the rectitude of every measure he was
obliged to espouse, right or wrong. Under this idea, was a new office to be
appointed, for the puspose of gratifying a particular family or connection, I
was to justify the necessity of that office; if new works were to be erected or
new contracts entered into, more with a design to enrich the erector or
contractor, than any public utility; I was to argue the matter down the throats
of the yea and nay members; if the civil list was in arrears, and money was
wanting to discharge them, I was to show the inadequateness of the
establishment to the expenses annexed to it, that it was necessary the dignity
of the crown should be kept up, and that the arrears were unavoidable; if a
negotiation abroad was to take place, in behalf of any family alliance or any
favorite measure, I was to color it in the best method I could, and give it
an appearance of expediency; in short, a respectable majority was to be carried
upon every motion, and it rested upon me to do it. It required ingenuity, it
required labor; but I knew it was to be done, and never failed in the attempt:
I made it a point to canvas the members, where I had any doubt of success, and
when I found they were not to be brought over by argument, I had recourse to
temptation; and, as Sir Robert Walpole used to say, I found every man had his
price. I have often thought, that was a member of the House, who wished to
speak, obliged to come forward and stand under a large extinguisher, drawn up
by a pulley, the string of which should be within the reach of the Speaker; he
might, whenever he wandered from the subject, or was out of order, let it down
upon the orator, and put an end to his harangue: it would save a great deal of
wrangling; a great deal of that time which is now taken up in false logic and
personal invective. But I beg the reader's pardon for this digression. I
carried on this disagreeable business too long, and was at last determined, if
I could not have some direction in political matters, not to be the slave of
those in power, and make my tongue always a traitor to my heart. My resolutions
on this head I communicated to the marquis; and my services were so useful,
that I was appointed a Secretary of State and admitted into the cabinet. This I
found to be a cabal indeed, and his Majesty to be merely a cipher; I felt for
his situation, and in every thing there debated, where I could with any degree
of justness and propriety throw the weight into his scale, I did. Had the
members of that cabinet been moderate and rational men, we might all have been
unanimous; for as I had no measures to carry, but what were in my opinion
consistent with the public good, I never obstinately contended in a bad cause:
but every one did not think as I thought, and as I was of the King's party, as
far as I could be with any propriety, and when I thought a measure wrong did
not easily give up my opinion, the cabinet was distracted, and I must either
retire or they would; in a word, I was too powerfully supported not to keep my
seat: the cabinet was dissolved, a new administration formed, my friend the
marquis resigned his office in my favor, and I had the honor to be appointed.

WHETHER things went on better or not, whilst I was at the head of the
Treasury, I will not take upon me to say, but they went on much smoother. I
became the ostensible man, and when I stood up in defense of any step, my
tongue and my heart went together. I found this office, like the other I held,
a very invidious one; that every thing I did was cavilled at and disapproved;
and that from the number of appointments in my disposal, I was harrassed to
death, and could scarce have the use of my own eyes or my own ears, but was
always open to misrepresentation and deception. After I had held my office for
two years, I handsomely resigned it. The only advantage my office was to me (if
it may be called an advantage) was the number of friends it procured me. For
years before I stood in the world, without a relation, without a connection: now
I might have had as many as I pleased. Some introduced themselves to me on a
former acquaintance, (but which I could not recollect); some as being
schoolfellows or neighbors; and some as fellow travelers; and others would
ransack their genealogy, to find out some degree of kindred to me. All were
assiduous to please me, all industrious to serve me; but I had then places and
good things to give away. All this, however, was no gratification. I found the
getting rid of the drudgery of franking, as great a relaxation as any thing.
Many a hot day have I slipped off my coat, and franked away as for life; and it
was no small vexation to think that I could not oblige my constituents, without
giving my passport to such a world of nonsense as my covers contained. Butt he
greatest pleasure I received was in acts of benevolence. I seldom listened to
the recommendations of this great man, or the remonstrances of that, (on which
account I had many enemies) but gave what was in the disposal of my department,
as I conceived would best answer the design of the appointment, and do the most
private good. I never amused a petitioner, as courtiers do, with false hopes
and expectancies, or buoyed him up with fallacious promises, which cruelly tend
to make his disappointment the greater. If I could serve him, and meant to do
it, I always did; if I did not mean it, I frankly told him so. I stood in no
danger of being served as the commander in chief was, by a lieutenant in the
army, who had lost his leg in the service, and who had been warmly recommended
to him for a company of invalids: he had amused this poor man for twelve
months, and kept him in London at an expense he could not support. Quite
wearied out with attending, he took an opportunity one day at his levee, as by
accident, to tread upon this great man's corns with his wooden stump, and put
him to great pain. Much concern was expressed at the accident, many submissive
apologies made, and the matter was forgiven but not forgotten; for whenever
this gentleman entered his levee afterward, he took care to distinguish
himself by stumping loudly across the room, which always created an alarm, and
lest he should tread upon the commander's toes again, he was presently provided
for. I never suffered a personal application from any one, but gave it out that
every petition should be in writing, and to these I bestowed a very nice
attention; him whom I thought best deserving and most adequate to the office to
be filled, I generally preferred; but I frequently set aside every applicant in
favor of modest men of abilities; who, through want of connexions, had no
friends to intercede for them, or whose merit had been too obscured to be
noticed by the public eye. The art of saying no, without hurting the person you
say it to, is one of the first accomplishments in life; few men know how to do
it; and I would persuade myself it arises from a good natured disposition,
unwilling to refuse what is asked. It is related of the late D. of N. that he
was so accustomed to promise, that no applicant whatever left his presence,
without an assurance of having what he solicited; when at the same time his
Grace scarcely knew what he had been asked for. A neighbor of his, a major in
the army, waited upon him on his return from abroad, where he had the
misfortune in an action to lose his leg: My dear major, says his Grace, running
up to him and embracing him, I Am heartily glad to see you, I hope all things go
well with you. -- I cannot say they do, my Lord Duke, returns he; I Have had the
misfortune to lose my......, -- Say no more, my dear major, retorts he quickly;
and stopping his mouth with his hand, and conceiving it to be some appointment
which he had lost, say no more, I entreat you, I Will give you a better. --
Better, my Lord! returns the major, that cannot be. -- How so? my dear friend,
how so? replies the Duke -- Because, rejoins the major, I have lost my leg. --
In the disposal of what I had to give, I never bestowed my favors where a
large family and a small income had not made some friendly assistance
necessary, and where the duties of the office did not, according to the best of
my judgment, point out the propriety of the bestowal. Many a worthy heart did I
gladden, many a distressed object did I relieve, and many an oppressed family
did I raise from the dust: so that I might really say, in the language of the
Patriarch, When the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me,
it gave witness to me, because I delivered the poor, the widow and the
fatherless, and him that had none to help him. And herein I will boast no
merit; I acted from a selfish principle; for when I relieved the distressed,
and made the widow's heart to sing for joy, I studied my propensities, and
gratified myself.

Was every great man to act as I did, he would be great indeed; they have such
numberless opportunities of doing good, that were they to embrace but a few,
they would not only render themselves popular, but be the admiration and idol
of the multitude.

Upon resigning my office, I gave up my pension, and being in the prime of
life, have married a young lady of beauty of the first rank and family; with a
fortune not inferior to my own, and mind that does honor to her sex. Retired
from public business, I am set down quietly on my estate in the country, a
favorite of fortune, and respected by my neighborhood, where my friend the
Vicar occasionally makes up part of my family, and we enjoy all the blessings
of domestic life.

FINIS.
TO LITERARY MEN.
IT having long been lamented, that in the present enlightened age, so little
encouragement should have been given to Literature, and that Authors should be
obliged to accept a price for their works very inadequate to their worth, from
an unwillingness, or inability, to risk the printing of them themselves; by
which means, not only they, bu their families after them, have been deprived of
the fruits of their labor. The REV. DR. TRUSLER, who, about twenty years
since, stood forward in an Association, called THE LITERARY SOCIETY, (whose
object was to print works of reputation, giving author's all profits arising
from the same, and leaving them in full and free possession of their
copy-right) proposes, as this public scheme was dropped, to revive it now, and
for this purpose has connected himself with several Literary Men, who will
print and publish, at their own risk, all such new and original works, as shall
be submitted to their perusal, and shall be thought by them worth printing, on
the terms to be had (gratis) of J. WALTER, PRINTING HOUSE SQUARE, BLACK FRIARS.

