
Leaving by an early train, I got to Limmeridge in time for dinner. The house 
was oppressively empty and dull. I had expected that good Mrs. Vesey would have 
been company for me in the absence of the young ladies, but she was confined to 
her room by a cold. The servants were so surprised at seeing me that they 
hurried and bustled absurdly, and made all sorts of annoying mistakes. Even the 
butler, who was old enough to have known better, brought me a bottle of port 
that was chilled. The reports of Mr. Fairlie's health were just as usual, and 
when I sent up a message to announce my arrival, I was told that he would be 
delighted to see me the next morning but that the sudden news of my appearance 
had prostrated him with palpitations for the rest of the evening. The wind 
howled dismally all night, and strange cracking and groaning noises sounded 
here, there, and everywhere in the empty house. I slept as wretchedly as 
possible, and got up in a mighty bad humour to breakfast by myself the next 
morning.

At ten o'clock I was conducted to Mr. Fairlie's apartments. He was in his usual 
room, his usual chair, and his usual aggravating state of mind and body. When I 
went in, his valet was standing before him, holding up for inspection a heavy 
volume of etchings, as long and as broad as my office writing-desk. The 
miserable foreigner grinned in the most abject manner, and looked ready to drop 
with fatigue, while his master composedly turned over the etchings, and brought 
their hidden beauties to light with the help of a magnifying glass.

"You very best of good old friends," said Mr. Fairlie, leaning back lazily 
before he could look at me, "are you QUITE well? How nice of you to come here 
and see me in my solitude. Dear Gilmore!"

I had expected that the valet would be dismissed when I appeared, but nothing 
of the sort happened. There he stood, in front of his master's chair, trembling 
under the weight of the etchings, and there Mr. Fairlie sat, serenely twirling 
the magnifying glass between his white fingers and thumbs.

"I have come to speak to you on a very important matter," I said, "and you will 
therefore excuse me, if I suggest that we had better be alone."

The unfortunate valet looked at me gratefully. Mr. Fairlie faintly repeated my 
last three words, "better be alone," with every appearance of the utmost 
possible astonishment.

I was in no humour for trifling, and I resolved to make him understand what I 
meant.

"Oblige me by giving that man permission to withdraw," I said, pointing to the 
valet.

Mr. Fairlie arched his eyebrows and pursed up his lips in sarcastic surprise.

"Man?" he repeated. "You provoking old Gilmore, what can you possibly mean by 
calling him a man? He's nothing of the sort. He might have been a man half an 
hour ago, before I wanted my etchings, and he may be a man half an hour hence, 
when I don't want them any longer. At present he is simply a portfolio stand. 
Why object, Gilmore, to a portfolio stand?"

"I DO object. For the third time, Mr. Fairlie, I beg that we may be alone."

My tone and manner left him no alternative but to comply with my request. He 
looked at the servant, and pointed peevishly to a chair at his side.

"Put down the etchings and go away," he said. "Don't upset me by losing my 
place. Have you, or have you not, lost my place? Are you sure you have not? And 
have you put my hand-bell quite within my reach? Yes? Then why the devil don't 
you go?"

The valet went out. Mr. Fairlie twisted himself round in his chair, polished 
the magnifying glass with his delicate cambric handkerchief, and indulged 
himself with a sidelong inspection of the open volume of etchings. It was not 
easy to keep my temper under these circumstances, but I did keep it.

"I have come here at great personal inconvenience," I said, "to serve the 
interests of your niece and your family, and I think I have established some 
slight claim to be favoured with your attention in return."

"Don't bully me!" exclaimed Mr. Fairlie, falling back helplessly in the chair, 
and closing his eyes. "Please don't bully me. I'm not strong enough."

I was determined not to let him provoke me, for Laura Fairlie's sake.

"My object," I went on, "is to entreat you to reconsider your letter, and not 
to force me to abandon the just rights of your niece, and of all who belong to 
her. Let me state the case to you once more, and for the last time."

Mr. Fairlie shook his head and sighed piteously.

"This is heartless of you, Gilmore—very heartless," he said. "Never mind, go 
on."

I put all the points to him carefully—I set the matter before him in every 
conceivable light. He lay back in the chair the whole time I was speaking with 
his eyes closed. When I had done he opened them indolently, took his silver 
smelling-bottle from the table, and sniffed at it with an air of gentle relish.

"Good Gilmore!" he said between the sniffs, "how very nice this is of you! How 
you reconcile one to human nature!"

"Give me a plain answer to a plain question, Mr. Fairlie. I tell you again, Sir 
Percival Glyde has no shadow of a claim to expect more than the income of the 
money. The money itself if your niece has no children, ought to be under her 
control, and to return to her family. If you stand firm, Sir Percival must give 
way—he must give way, I tell you, or he exposes himself to the base 
imputation of marrying Miss Fairlie entirely from mercenary motives."

Mr. Fairlie shook the silver smelling-bottle at me playfully.

"You dear old Gilmore, how you do hate rank and family, don't you? How you 
detest Glyde because he happens to be a baronet. What a Radical you are—oh, 
dear me, what a Radical you are!"

A Radical!!! I could put up with a good deal of provocation, but, after holding 
the soundest Conservative principles all my life, I could NOT put up with being 
called a Radical. My blood boiled at it—I started out of my chair—I was 
speechless with Indignation.

"Don't shake the room!" cried Mr. Fairlie—"for Heaven's sake don't shake the 
room! Worthiest of all possible Gilmores, I meant no offence. My own views are 
so extremely liberal that I think I am a Radical myself. Yes. We are a pair of 
Radicals. Please don't be angry. I can't quarrel—I haven't stamina enough. 
Shall we drop the subject? Yes. Come and look at these sweet etchings. Do let 
me teach you to understand the heavenly pearliness of these lines. Do now, 
there's a good Gilmore!"

While he was maundering on in this way I was, fortunately for my own 
self-respect, returning to my senses. When I spoke again I was composed enough 
to treat his impertinence with the silent contempt that it deserved.

"You are entirely wrong, sir," I said, "in supposing that I speak from any 
prejudice against Sir Percival Glyde. I may regret that he has so unreservedly 
resigned himself in this matter to his lawyer's direction as to make any appeal 
to himself impossible, but I am not prejudiced against him. What I have said 
would equally apply to any other man in his situation, high or low. The 
principle I maintain is a recognised principle. If you were to apply at the 
nearest town here, to the first respectable solicitor you could find, he would 
tell you as a stranger what I tell you as a friend. He would inform you that it 
is against all rule to abandon the lady's money entirely to the man she 
marries. He would decline, on grounds of common legal caution, to give the 
husband, under any circumstances whatever, an interest of twenty thousand 
pounds in his wife's death."

"Would he really, Gilmore?" said Mr. Fairlie. "If he said anything half so 
horrid, I do assure you I should tinkle my bell for Louis, and have him sent 
out of the house immediately."

"You shall not irritate me, Mr. Fairlie—for your niece's sake and for her 
father's sake, you shall not irritate me. You shall take the whole 
responsibility of this discreditable settlement on your own shoulders before I 
leave the room."

"Don't!—now please don't!" said Mr. Fairlie. "Think how precious your time 
is, Gilmore, and don't throw it away. I would dispute with you if I could, but 
I can't—I haven't stamina enough. You want to upset me, to upset yourself, to 
upset Glyde, and to upset Laura; and—oh, dear me!—all for the sake of the 
very last thing in the world that is likely to happen. No, dear friend, in the 
interests of peace and quietness, positively No!"

"I am to understand, then, that you hold by the determination expressed in your 
letter?"

"Yes, please. So glad we understand each other at last. Sit down again—do!"

I walked at once to the door, and Mr. Fairlie resignedly "tinkled" his 
hand-bell. Before I left the room I turned round and addressed him for the last 
time.

"Whatever happens in the future, sir," I said, "remember that my plain duty of 
warning you has been performed. As the faithful friend and servant of your 
family, I tell you, at parting, that no daughter of mine should be married to 
any man alive under such a settlement as you are forcing me to make for Miss 
Fairlie."

The door opened behind me, and the valet stood waiting on the threshold.

"Louis," said Mr. Fairlie, "show Mr. Gilmore out, and then come back and hold 
up my etchings for me again. Make them give you a good lunch downstairs. Do, 
Gilmore, make my idle beasts of servants give you a good lunch!"

I was too much disgusted to reply—I turned on my heel, and left him in 
silence. There was an up train at two o'clock in the afternoon, and by that 
train I returned to London.

On the Tuesday I sent in the altered settlement, which practically disinherited 
the very persons whom Miss Fairlie's own lips had informed me she was most 
anxious to benefit. I had no choice. Another lawyer would have drawn up the 
deed if I had refused to undertake it.


My task is done. My personal share in the events of the family story extends no 
farther than the point which I have just reached. Other pens than mine will 
describe the strange circumstances which are now shortly to follow. Seriously 
and sorrowfully I close this brief record. Seriously and sorrowfully I repeat 
here the parting words that I spoke at Limmeridge House:—No daughter of mine 
should have been married to any man alive under such a settlement as I was 
compelled to make for Laura Fairlie.


The End of Mr. Gilmore's Narrative.




THE STORY CONTINUED BY MARIAN HALCOMBE

(in Extracts from her Diary)



LIMMERIDGE HOUSE, Nov. 8.[1]

[1] The passages omitted, here and elsewhere, in Miss Halcombe's Diary are only 
those which bear no reference to Miss Fairlie or to any of the persons with 
whom she is associated in these pages.


This morning Mr. Gilmore left us.

His interview with Laura had evidently grieved and surprised him more than he 
liked to confess. I felt afraid, from his look and manner when we parted, that 
she might have inadvertently betrayed to him the real secret of her depression 
and my anxiety. This doubt grew on me so, after he had gone, that I declined 
riding out with Sir Percival, and went up to Laura's room instead.

I have been sadly distrustful of myself, in this difficult and lamentable 
matter, ever since I found out my own ignorance of the strength of Laura's 
unhappy attachment. I ought to have known that the delicacy and forbearance and 
sense of honour which drew me to poor Hartright, and made me so sincerely 
admire and respect him, were just the qualities to appeal most irresistibly to 
Laura's natural sensitiveness and natural generosity of nature. And yet, until 
she opened her heart to me of her own accord, I had no suspicion that this new 
feeling had taken root so deeply. I once thought time and care might remove it. 
I now fear that it will remain with her and alter her for life. The discovery 
that I have committed such an error in judgment as this makes me hesitate about 
everything else. I hesitate about Sir Percival, in the face of the plainest 
proofs. I hesitate even in speaking to Laura. On this very morning I doubted, 
with my hand on the door, whether I should ask her the questions I had come to 
put, or not.

When I went into her room I found her walking up and down in great impatience. 
She looked flushed and excited, and she came forward at once, and spoke to me 
before I could open my lips.

"I wanted you," she said. "Come and sit down on the sofa with me. Marian! I can 
bear this no longer—I must and will end it."

There was too much colour in her cheeks, too much energy in her manner, too 
much firmness in her voice. The little book of Hartright's drawings—the fatal 
book that she will dream over whenever she is alone—was in one of her hands. 
I began by gently and firmly taking it from her, and putting it out of sight on 
a side-table.

"Tell me quietly, my darling, what you wish to do," I said. "Has Mr. Gilmore 
been advising you?"

She shook her head. "No, not in what I am thinking of now. He was very kind and 
good to me, Marian, and I am ashamed to say I distressed him by crying. I am 
miserably helpless—I can't control myself. For my own sake, and for all our 
sakes, I must have courage enough to end it."

"Do you mean courage enough to claim your release?" I asked.

"No," she said simply. "Courage, dear, to tell the truth."

She put her arms round my neck, and rested her head quietly on my bosom. On the 
opposite wall hung the miniature portrait of her father. I bent over her, and 
saw that she was looking at it while her head lay on my breast.

"I can never claim my release from my engagement," she went on. "Whatever way 
it ends it must end wretchedly for me. All I can do, Marian, is not to add the 
remembrance that I have broken my promise and forgotten my father's dying 
words, to make that wretchedness worse."

"What is it you propose, then?" I asked.

"To tell Sir Percival Glyde the truth with my own lips," she answered, "and to 
let him release me, if he will, not because I ask him, but because he knows 
all."

"What do you mean, Laura, by 'all'? Sir Percival will know enough (he has told 
me so himself) if he knows that the engagement is opposed to your own wishes."

"Can I tell him that, when the engagement was made for me by my father, with my 
own consent? I should have kept my promise, not happily, I am afraid, but still 
contentedly—" she stopped, turned her face to me, and laid her cheek close 
against mine—"I should have kept my engagement, Marian, if another love had 
not grown up in my heart, which was not there when I first promised to be Sir 
Percival's wife."

"Laura! you will never lower yourself by making a confession to him?"

"I shall lower myself, indeed, if I gain my release by hiding from him what he 
has a right to know."

"He has not the shadow of a right to know it!"

"Wrong, Marian, wrong! I ought to deceive no one—least of all the man to whom 
my father gave me, and to whom I gave myself." She put her lips to mine, and 
kissed me. "My own love," she said softly, "you are so much too fond of me, and 
so much too proud of me, that you forget, in my case, what you would remember 
in your own. Better that Sir Percival should doubt my motives, and misjudge my 
conduct if he will, than that I should be first false to him in thought, and 
then mean enough to serve my own interests by hiding the falsehood."

I held her away from me in astonishment. For the first time in our lives we had 
changed places—the resolution was all on her side, the hesitation all on 
mine. I looked into the pale, quiet, resigned young face—I saw the pure, 
innocent heart, in the loving eyes that looked back at me—and the poor 
worldly cautions and objections that rose to my lips dwindled and died away in 
their own emptiness. I hung my head in silence. In her place the despicably 
small pride which makes so many women deceitful would have been my pride, and 
would have made me deceitful too.

"Don't be angry with me, Marian," she said, mistaking my silence.

I only answered by drawing her close to me again. I was afraid of crying if I 
spoke. My tears do not flow so easily as they ought—they come almost like 
men's tears, with sobs that seem to tear me in pieces, and that frighten every 
one about me.

"I have thought of this, love, for many days," she went on, twining and 
twisting my hair with that childish restlessness in her fingers, which poor 
Mrs. Vesey still tries so patiently and so vainly to cure her of—"I have 
thought of it very seriously, and I can be sure of my courage when my own 
conscience tells me I am right. Let me speak to him to-morrow—in your 
presence, Marian. I will say nothing that is wrong, nothing that you or I need 
be ashamed of—but, oh, it will ease my heart so to end this miserable 
concealment! Only let me know and feel that I have no deception to answer for 
on my side, and then, when he has heard what I have to say, let him act towards 
me as he will."

She sighed, and put her head back in its old position on my bosom. Sad 
misgivings about what the end would be weighed upon my mind, but still 
distrusting myself, I told her that I would do as she wished. She thanked me, 
and we passed gradually into talking of other things.

At dinner she joined us again, and was more easy and more herself with Sir 
Percival than I have seen her yet. In the evening she went to the piano, 
choosing new music of the dexterous, tuneless, florid kind. The lovely old 
melodies of Mozart, which poor Hartright was so fond of, she has never played 
since he left. The book is no longer in the music-stand. She took the volume 
away herself, so that nobody might find it out and ask her to play from it.

I had no opportunity of discovering whether her purpose of the morning had 
changed or not, until she wished Sir Percival good-night—and then her own 
words informed me that it was unaltered. She said, very quietly, that she 
wished to speak to him after breakfast, and that he would find her in her 
sitting-room with me. He changed colour at those words, and I felt his hand 
trembling a little when it came to my turn to take it. The event of the next 
morning would decide his future life, and he evidently knew it.

I went in, as usual, through the door between our two bedrooms, to bid Laura 
good-night before she went to sleep. In stooping over her to kiss her I saw the 
little book of Hartright's drawings half hidden under her pillow, just in the 
place where she used to hide her favourite toys when she was a child. I could 
not find it in my heart to say anything, but I pointed to the book and shook my 
head. She reached both hands up to my cheeks, and drew my face down to hers 
till our lips met.

"Leave it there to-night," she whispered; "to-morrow may be cruel, and may make 
me say good-bye to it for ever."


9th.—The first event of the morning was not of a kind to raise my spirits—a 
letter arrived for me from poor Walter Hartright. It is the answer to mine 
describing the manner in which Sir Percival cleared himself of the suspicions 
raised by Anne Catherick's letter. He writes shortly and bitterly about Sir 
Percival's explanations, only saying that he has no right to offer an opinion 
on the conduct of those who are above him. This is sad, but his occasional 
references to himself grieve me still more. He says that the effort to return 
to his old habits and pursuits grows harder instead of easier to him every day 
and he implores me, if I have any interest, to exert it to get him employment 
that will necessitate his absence from England, and take him among new scenes 
and new people. I have been made all the readier to comply with this request by 
a passage at the end of his letter, which has almost alarmed me.

After mentioning that he has neither seen nor heard anything of Anne Catherick, 
he suddenly breaks off, and hints in the most abrupt, mysterious manner, that 
he has been perpetually watched and followed by strange men ever since he 
returned to London. He acknowledges that he cannot prove this extraordinary 
suspicion by fixing on any particular persons, but he declares that the 
suspicion itself is present to him night and day. This has frightened me, 
because it looks as if his one fixed idea about Laura was becoming too much for 
his mind. I will write immediately to some of my mother's influential old 
friends in London, and press his claims on their notice. Change of scene and 
change of occupation may really be the salvation of him at this crisis in his 
life.

Greatly to my relief, Sir Percival sent an apology for not joining us at 
breakfast. He had taken an early cup of coffee in his own room, and he was 
still engaged there in writing letters. At eleven o'clock, if that hour was 
convenient, he would do himself the honour of waiting on Miss Fairlie and Miss 
Halcombe.

My eyes were on Laura's face while the message was being delivered. I had found 
her unaccountably quiet and composed on going into her room in the morning, and 
so she remained all through breakfast. Even when we were sitting together on 
the sofa in her room, waiting for Sir Percival, she still preserved her 
self-control.

"Don't be afraid of me, Marian," was all she said; "I may forget myself with an 
old friend like Mr. Gilmore, or with a dear sister like you, but I will not 
forget myself with Sir Percival Glyde."

I looked at her, and listened to her in silent surprise. Through all the years 
of our close intimacy this passive force in her character had been hidden from 
me—hidden even from herself, till love found it, and suffering called it 
forth.

As the clock on the mantelpiece struck eleven Sir Percival knocked at the door 
and came in. There was suppressed anxiety and agitation in every line of his 
face. The dry, sharp cough, which teases him at most times, seemed to be 
troubling him more incessantly than ever. He sat down opposite to us at the 
table, and Laura remained by me. I looked attentively at them both, and he was 
the palest of the two.

He said a few unimportant words, with a visible effort to preserve his 
customary ease of manner. But his voice was not to be steadied, and the 
restless uneasiness in his eyes was not to be concealed. He must have felt this 
himself, for he stopped in the middle of a sentence, and gave up even the 
attempt to hide his embarrassment any longer.

There was just one moment of dead silence before Laura addressed him.

"I wish to speak to you, Sir Percival," she said, "on a subject that is very 
important to us both. My sister is here, because her presence helps me and 
gives me confidence. She has not suggested one word of what I am going to 
say—I speak from my own thoughts, not from hers. I am sure you will be kind 
enough to understand that before I go any farther?"

Sir Percival bowed. She had proceeded thus far, with perfect outward 
tranquillity and perfect propriety of manner. She looked at him, and he looked 
at her. They seemed, at the outset, at least, resolved to understand one 
another plainly.

"I have heard from Marian," she went on, "that I have only to claim my release 
from our engagement to obtain that release from you. It was forbearing and 
generous on your part, Sir Percival, to send me such a message. It is only 
doing you justice to say that I am grateful for the offer, and I hope and 
believe that it is only doing myself justice to tell you that I decline to 
accept it."

His attentive face relaxed a little. But I saw one of his feet, softly, 
quietly, incessantly beating on the carpet under the table, and I felt that he 
was secretly as anxious as ever.

"I have not forgotten," she said, "that you asked my father's permission before 
you honoured me with a proposal of marriage. Perhaps you have not forgotten 
either what I said when I consented to our engagement? I ventured to tell you 
that my father's influence and advice had mainly decided me to give you my 
promise. I was guided by my father, because I had always found him the truest 
of all advisers, the best and fondest of all protectors and friends. I have 
lost him now—I have only his memory to love, but my faith in that dear dead 
friend has never been shaken. I believe at this moment, as truly as I ever 
believed, that he knew what was best, and that his hopes and wishes ought to be 
my hopes and wishes too."

Her voice trembled for the first time. Her restless fingers stole their way 
into my lap, and held fast by one of my hands. There was another moment of 
silence, and then Sir Percival spoke.

"May I ask," he said, "if I have ever proved myself unworthy of the trust which 
it has been hitherto my greatest honour and greatest happiness to possess?"

"I have found nothing in your conduct to blame," she answered. "You have always 
treated me with the same delicacy and the same forbearance. You have deserved 
my trust, and, what is of far more importance in my estimation, you have 
deserved my father's trust, out of which mine grew. You have given me no 
excuse, even if I had wanted to find one, for asking to be released from my 
pledge. What I have said so far has been spoken with the wish to acknowledge my 
whole obligation to you. My regard for that obligation, my regard for my 
father's memory, and my regard for my own promise, all forbid me to set the 
example, on my side, of withdrawing from our present position. The breaking of 
our engagement must be entirely your wish and your act, Sir Percival—not 
mine."

The uneasy beating of his foot suddenly stopped, and he leaned forward eagerly 
across the table.

"My act?" he said. "What reason can there be on my side for withdrawing?"

I heard her breath quickening—I felt her hand growing cold. In spite of what 
she had said to me when we were alone, I began to be afraid of her. I was wrong.

"A reason that it is very hard to tell you," she answered. "There is a change 
in me, Sir Percival—a change which is serious enough to justify you, to 
yourself and to me, in breaking off our engagement."

His face turned so pale again that even his lips lost their colour. He raised 
the arm which lay on the table, turned a little away in his chair, and 
supported his head on his hand, so that his profile only was presented to us.

"What change?" he asked. The tone in which he put the question jarred on 
me—there was something painfully suppressed in it.

She sighed heavily, and leaned towards me a little, so as to rest her shoulder 
against mine. I felt her trembling, and tried to spare her by speaking myself. 
She stopped me by a warning pressure of her hand, and then addressed Sir 
Percival one more, but this time without looking at him.

"I have heard," she said, "and I believe it, that the fondest and truest of all 
affections is the affection which a woman ought to bear to her husband. When 
our engagement began that affection was mine to give, if I could, and yours to 
win, if you could. Will you pardon me, and spare me, Sir Percival, if I 
acknowledge that it is not so any longer?"

A few tears gathered in her eyes, and dropped over her cheeks slowly as she 
paused and waited for his answer. He did not utter a word. At the beginning of 
her reply he had moved the hand on which his head rested, so that it hid his 
face. I saw nothing but the upper part of his figure at the table. Not a muscle 
of him moved. The fingers of the hand which supported his head were dented deep 
in his hair. They might have expressed hidden anger or hidden grief—it was 
hard to say which—there was no significant trembling in them. There was 
nothing, absolutely nothing, to tell the secret of his thoughts at that 
moment—the moment which was the crisis of his life and the crisis of hers.

I was determined to make him declare himself, for Laura's sake.

"Sir Percival!" I interposed sharply, "have you nothing to say when my sister 
has said so much? More, in my opinion," I added, my unlucky temper getting the 
better of me, "than any man alive, in your position, has a right to hear from 
her."

That last rash sentence opened a way for him by which to escape me if he chose, 
and he instantly took advantage of it.

"Pardon me, Miss Halcombe," he said, still keeping his hand over his face, 
"pardon me if I remind you that I have claimed no such right."

The few plain words which would have brought him back to the point from which 
he had wandered were just on my lips, when Laura checked me by speaking again.

"I hope I have not made my painful acknowledgment in vain," she continued. "I 
hope it has secured me your entire confidence in what I have still to say?"

"Pray be assured of it." He made that brief reply warmly, dropping his hand on 
the table while he spoke, and turning towards us again. Whatever outward change 
had passed over him was gone now. His face was eager and expectant—it 
expressed nothing but the most intense anxiety to hear her next words.

"I wish you to understand that I have not spoken from any selfish motive," she 
said. "If you leave me, Sir Percival, after what you have just heard, you do 
not leave me to marry another man, you only allow me to remain a single woman 
for the rest of my life. My fault towards you has begun and ended in my own 
thoughts. It can never go any farther. No word has passed—" She hesitated, in 
doubt about the expression she should use next, hesitated in a momentary 
confusion which it was very sad and very painful to see. "No word has passed," 
she patiently and resolutely resumed, "between myself and the person to whom I 
am now referring for the first and last time in your presence of my feelings 
towards him, or of his feelings towards me—no word ever can pass—neither he 
nor I are likely, in this world, to meet again. I earnestly beg you to spare me 
from saying any more, and to believe me, on my word, in what I have just told 
you. It is the truth. Sir Percival, the truth which I think my promised husband 
has a claim to hear, at any sacrifice of my own feelings. I trust to his 
generosity to pardon me, and to his honour to keep my secret."

"Both those trusts are sacred to me," he said, "and both shall be sacredly 
kept."

After answering in those terms he paused, and looked at her as if he was 
waiting to hear more.

"I have said all I wish to say," she added quietly—"I have said more than 
enough to justify you in withdrawing from your engagement."

"You have said more than enough," he answered, "to make it the dearest object 
of my life to KEEP the engagement." With those words he rose from his chair, 
and advanced a few steps towards the place where she was sitting.

She started violently, and a faint cry of surprise escaped her. Every word she 
had spoken had innocently betrayed her purity and truth to a man who thoroughly 
understood the priceless value of a pure and true woman. Her own noble conduct 
had been the hidden enemy, throughout, of all the hopes she had trusted to it. 
I had dreaded this from the first. I would have prevented it, if she had 
allowed me the smallest chance of doing so. I even waited and watched now, when 
the harm was done, for a word from Sir Percival that would give me the 
opportunity of putting him in the wrong.

"You have left it to ME, Miss Fairlie, to resign you," he continued. "I am not 
heartless enough to resign a woman who has just shown herself to be the noblest 
of her sex."

He spoke with such warmth and feeling, with such passionate enthusiasm, and yet 
with such perfect delicacy, that she raised her head, flushed up a little, and 
looked at him with sudden animation and spirit.

"No!" she said firmly. "The most wretched of her sex, if she must give herself 
in marriage when she cannot give her love."

"May she not give it in the future," he asked, "if the one object of her 
husband's life is to deserve it?"

"Never!" she answered. "If you still persist in maintaining our engagement, I 
may be your true and faithful wife, Sir Percival—your loving wife, if I know 
my own heart, never!"

She looked so irresistibly beautiful as she said those brave words that no man 
alive could have steeled his heart against her. I tried hard to feel that Sir 
Percival was to blame, and to say so, but my womanhood would pity him, in spite 
of myself.

"I gratefully accept your faith and truth," he said. "The least that you can 
offer is more to me than the utmost that I could hope for from any other woman 
in the world."

Her left hand still held mine, but her right hand hung listlessly at her side. 
He raised it gently to his lips—touched it with them, rather than kissed 
it—bowed to me—and then, with perfect delicacy and discretion, silently 
quitted the room.

She neither moved nor said a word when he was gone—she sat by me, cold and 
still, with her eyes fixed on the ground. I saw it was hopeless and useless to 
speak, and I only put my arm round her, and held her to me in silence. We 
remained together so for what seemed a long and weary time—so long and so 
weary, that I grew uneasy and spoke to her softly, in the hope of producing a 
change.

The sound of my voice seemed to startle her into consciousness. She suddenly 
drew herself away from me and rose to her feet.

"I must submit, Marian, as well as I can," she said. "My new life has its hard 
duties, and one of them begins to-day."

As she spoke she went to a side-table near the window, on which her sketching 
materials were placed, gathered them together carefully, and put them in a 
drawer of her cabinet. She locked the drawer and brought the key to me.

"I must part from everything that reminds me of him," she said. "Keep the key 
wherever you please—I shall never want it again."

Before I could say a word she had turned away to her book-case, and had taken 
from it the album that contained Walter Hartright's drawings. She hesitated for 
a moment, holding the little volume fondly in her hands—then lifted it to her 
lips and kissed it.

"Oh, Laura! Laura!" I said, not angrily, not reprovingly—with nothing but 
sorrow in my voice, and nothing but sorrow in my heart.

"It is the last time, Marian," she pleaded. "I am bidding it good-bye for ever."

She laid the book on the table and drew out the comb that fastened her hair. It 
fell, in its matchless beauty, over her back and shoulders, and dropped round 
her, far below her waist. She separated one long, thin lock from the rest, cut 
it off, and pinned it carefully, in the form of a circle, on the first blank 
page of the album. The moment it was fastened she closed the volume hurriedly, 
and placed it in my hands.

"You write to him and he writes to you," she said. "While I am alive, if he 
asks after me always tell him I am well, and never say I am unhappy. Don't 
distress him, Marian, for my sake, don't distress him. If I die first, promise 
you will give him this little book of his drawings, with my hair in it. There 
can be no harm, when I am gone, in telling him that I put it there with my own 
hands. And say—oh, Marian, say for me, then, what I can never say for 
myself—say I loved him!"

She flung her arms round my neck, and whispered the last words in my ear with a 
passionate delight in uttering them which it almost broke my heart to hear. All 
the long restraint she had imposed on herself gave way in that first last 
outburst of tenderness. She broke from me with hysterical vehemence, and threw 
herself on the sofa in a paroxysm of sobs and tears that shook her from head to 
foot.

I tried vainly to soothe her and reason with her—she was past being soothed, 
and past being reasoned with. It was the sad, sudden end for us two of this 
memorable day. When the fit had worn itself out she was too exhausted to speak. 
She slumbered towards the afternoon, and I put away the book of drawings so 
that she might not see it when she woke. My face was calm, whatever my heart 
might be, when she opened her eyes again and looked at me. We said no more to 
each other about the distressing interview of the morning. Sir Percival's name 
was not mentioned. Walter Hartright was not alluded to again by either of us 
for the remainder of the day.


10th.—Finding that she was composed and like herself this morning, I returned 
to the painful subject of yesterday, for the sole purpose of imploring her to 
let me speak to Sir Percival and Mr. Fairlie, more plainly and strongly than 
she could speak to either of them herself, about this lamentable marriage. She 
interposed, gently but firmly, in the middle of my remonstrances.

"I left yesterday to decide," she said; "and yesterday HAS decided. It is too 
late to go back."

Sir Percival spoke to me this afternoon about what had passed in Laura's room. 
He assured me that the unparalleled trust she had placed in him had awakened 
such an answering conviction of her innocence and integrity in his mind, that 
he was guiltless of having felt even a moment's unworthy jealousy, either at 
the time when he was in her presence, or afterwards when he had withdrawn from 
it. Deeply as he lamented the unfortunate attachment which had hindered the 
progress he might otherwise have made in her esteem and regard, he firmly 
believed that it had remained unacknowledged in the past, and that it would 
remain, under all changes of circumstance which it was possible to contemplate, 
unacknowledged in the future. This was his absolute conviction; and the 
strongest proof he could give of it was the assurance, which he now offered, 
that he felt no curiosity to know whether the attachment was of recent date or 
not, or who had been the object of it. His implicit confidence in Miss Fairlie 
made him satisfied with what she had thought fit to say to him, and he was 
honestly innocent of the slightest feeling of anxiety to hear more.

He waited after saying those words and looked at me. I was so conscious of my 
unreasonable prejudice against him—so conscious of an unworthy suspicion that 
he might be speculating on my impulsively answering the very questions which he 
had just described himself as resolved not to ask—that I evaded all reference 
to this part of the subject with something like a feeling of confusion on my 
own part. At the same time I was resolved not to lose even the smallest 
opportunity of trying to plead Laura's cause, and I told him boldly that I 
regretted his generosity had not carried him one step farther, and induced him 
to withdraw from the engagement altogether.

Here, again, he disarmed me by not attempting to defend himself. He would 
merely beg me to remember the difference there was between his allowing Miss 
Fairlie to give him up, which was a matter of submission only, and his forcing 
himself to give up Miss Fairlie, which was, in other words, asking him to be 
the suicide of his own hopes. Her conduct of the day before had so strengthened 
the unchangeable love and admiration of two long years, that all active 
contention against those feelings, on his part, was henceforth entirely out of 
his power. I must think him weak, selfish, unfeeling towards the very woman 
whom he idolised, and he must bow to my opinion as resignedly as he 
could—only putting it to me, at the same time, whether her future as a single 
woman, pining under an unhappily placed attachment which she could never 
acknowledge, could be said to promise her a much brighter prospect than her 
future as the wife of a man who worshipped the very ground she walked on? In 
the last case there was hope from time, however slight it might be—in the 
first case, on her own showing, there was no hope at all.

I answered him—more because my tongue is a woman's, and must answer, than 
because I had anything convincing to say. It was only too plain that the course 
Laura had adopted the day before had offered him the advantage if he chose to 
take it—and that he HAD chosen to take it. I felt this at the time, and I 
feel it just as strongly now, while I write these lines, in my own room. The 
one hope left is that his motives really spring, as he says they do, from the 
irresistible strength of his attachment to Laura.

Before I close my diary for to-night I must record that I wrote to-day, in poor 
Hartright's interest, to two of my mother's old friends in London—both men of 
influence and position. If they can do anything for him, I am quite sure they 
will. Except Laura, I never was more anxious about any one than I am now about 
Walter. All that has happened since he left us has only increased my strong 
regard and sympathy for him. I hope I am doing right in trying to help him to 
employment abroad—I hope, most earnestly and anxiously, that it will end well.


11th.—Sir Percival had an interview with Mr. Fairlie, and I was sent for to 
join them.

I found Mr. Fairlie greatly relieved at the prospect of the "family worry" (as 
he was pleased to describe his niece's marriage) being settled at last. So far, 
I did not feel called on to say anything to him about my own opinion, but when 
he proceeded, in his most aggravatingly languid manner, to suggest that the 
time for the marriage had better be settled next, in accordance with Sir 
Percival's wishes, I enjoyed the satisfaction of assailing Mr. Fairlie's nerves 
with as strong a protest against hurrying Laura's decision as I could put into 
words. Sir Percival immediately assured me that he felt the force of my 
objection, and begged me to believe that the proposal had not been made in 
consequence of any interference on his part. Mr. Fairlie leaned back in his 
chair, closed his eyes, said we both of us did honour to human nature, and then 
repeated his suggestion as coolly as if neither Sir Percival nor I had said a 
word in opposition to it. It ended in my flatly declining to mention the 
subject to Laura, unless she first approached it of her own accord. I left the 
room at once after making that declaration. Sir Percival looked seriously 
embarrassed and distressed, Mr. Fairlie stretched out his lazy legs on his 
velvet footstool, and said, "Dear Marian! how I envy you your robust nervous 
system! Don't bang the door!"

On going to Laura's room I found that she had asked for me, and that Mrs. Vesey 
had informed her that I was with Mr. Fairlie. She inquired at once what I had 
been wanted for, and I told her all that had passed, without attempting to 
conceal the vexation and annoyance that I really felt. Her answer surprised and 
distressed me inexpressibly—it was the very last reply that I should have 
expected her to make.

"My uncle is right," she said. "I have caused trouble and anxiety enough to 
you, and to all about me. Let me cause no more, Marian—let Sir Percival 
decide."

I remonstrated warmly, but nothing that I could say moved her.

"I am held to my engagement," she replied; "I have broken with my old life. The 
evil day will not come the less surely because I put it off. No, Marian! once 
again my uncle is right. I have caused trouble enough and anxiety enough, and I 
will cause no more."

She used to be pliability itself, but she was now inflexibly passive in her 
resignation—I might almost say in her despair. Dearly as I love her, I should 
have been less pained if she had been violently agitated—it was so shockingly 
unlike her natural character to see her as cold and insensible as I saw her now.


12th.—Sir Percival put some questions to me at breakfast about Laura, which 
left me no choice but to tell him what she had said.

While we were talking she herself came down and joined us. She was just as 
unnaturally composed in Sir Percival's presence as she had been in mine. When 
breakfast was over he had an opportunity of saying a few words to her 
privately, in a recess of one of the windows. They were not more than two or 
three minutes together, and on their separating she left the room with Mrs. 
Vesey, while Sir Percival came to me. He said he had entreated her to favour 
him by maintaining her privilege of fixing the time for the marriage at her own 
will and pleasure. In reply she had merely expressed her acknowledgments, and 
had desired him to mention what his wishes were to Miss Halcombe.

I have no patience to write more. In this instance, as in every other, Sir 
Percival has carried his point with the utmost possible credit to himself, in 
spite of everything that I can say or do. His wishes are now, what they were, 
of course, when he first came here; and Laura having resigned herself to the 
one inevitable sacrifice of the marriage, remains as coldly hopeless and 
enduring as ever. In parting with the little occupations and relics that 
reminded her of Hartright, she seems to have parted with all her tenderness and 
all her impressibility. It is only three o'clock in the afternoon while I write 
these lines, and Sir Percival has left us already, in the happy hurry of a 
bridegroom, to prepare for the bride's reception at his house in Hampshire. 
Unless some extraordinary event happens to prevent it they will be married 
exactly at the time when he wished to be married—before the end of the year. 
My very fingers burn as I write it!


13th.—A sleepless night, through uneasiness about Laura. Towards the morning 
I came to a resolution to try what change of scene would do to rouse her. She 
cannot surely remain in her present torpor of insensibility, if I take her away 
from Limmeridge and surround her with the pleasant faces of old friends? After 
some consideration I decided on writing to the Arnolds, in Yorkshire. They are 
simple, kind-hearted, hospitable people, and she has known them from her 
childhood. When I had put the letter in the post-bag I told her what I had 
done. It would have been a relief to me if she had shown the spirit to resist 
and object. But no—she only said, "I will go anywhere with you, Marian. I 
dare say you are right—I dare say the change will do me good."


14th.—I wrote to Mr. Gilmore, informing him that there was really a prospect 
of this miserable marriage taking place, and also mentioning my idea of trying 
what change of scene would do for Laura. I had no heart to go into particulars. 
Time enough for them when we get nearer to the end of the year.


15th.—Three letters for me. The first, from the Arnolds, full of delight at 
the prospect of seeing Laura and me. The second, from one of the gentlemen to 
whom I wrote on Walter Hartright's behalf, informing me that he has been 
fortunate enough to find an opportunity of complying with my request. The 
third, from Walter himself, thanking me, poor fellow, in the warmest terms, for 
giving him an opportunity of leaving his home, his country, and his friends. A 
private expedition to make excavations among the ruined cities of Central 
America is, it seems, about to sail from Liverpool. The draughtsman who had 
been already appointed to accompany it has lost heart, and withdrawn at the 
eleventh hour, and Walter is to fill his place. He is to be engaged for six 
months certain, from the time of the landing in Honduras, and for a year 
afterwards, if the excavations are successful, and if the funds hold out. His 
letter ends with a promise to write me a farewell line when they are all on 
board ship, and when the pilot leaves them. I can only hope and pray earnestly 
that he and I are both acting in this matter for the best. It seems such a 
serious step for him to take, that the mere contemplation of it startles me. 
And yet, in his unhappy position, how can I expect him or wish him to remain at 
home?


16th.—The carriage is at the door. Laura and I set out on our visit to the 
Arnolds to-day.



POLESDEAN LODGE, YORKSHIRE.

23rd.—A week in these new scenes and among these kind-hearted people has done 
her some good, though not so much as I had hoped. I have resolved to prolong 
our stay for another week at least. It is useless to go back to Limmeridge till 
there is an absolute necessity for our return.


24th.—Sad news by this morning's post. The expedition to Central America 
sailed on the twenty-first. We have parted with a true man—we have lost a 
faithful friend. Water Hartright has left England.


25th.—Sad news yesterday—ominous news to-day. Sir Percival Glyde has 
written to Mr. Fairlie, and Mr. Fairlie has written to Laura and me, to recall 
us to Limmeridge immediately.

What can this mean? Has the day for the marriage been fixed in our absence?


