
The inquest was hurried for certain local reasons which weighed with the 
coroner and the town authorities. It was held on the afternoon of the next day. 
I was necessarily one among the witnesses summoned to assist the objects of the 
investigation.

My first proceeding in the morning was to go to the post-office, and inquire 
for the letter which I expected from Marian. No change of circumstances, 
however extraordinary, could affect the one great anxiety which weighed on my 
mind while I was away from London. The morning's letter, which was the only 
assurance I could receive that no misfortune had happened in my absence, was 
still the absorbing interest with which my day began.

To my relief, the letter from Marian was at the office waiting for me.

Nothing had happened—they were both as safe and as well as when I had left 
them. Laura sent her love, and begged that I would let her know of my return a 
day beforehand. Her sister added, in explanation of this message, that she had 
saved "nearly a sovereign" out of her own private purse, and that she had 
claimed the privilege of ordering the dinner and giving the dinner which was to 
celebrate the day of my return. I read these little domestic confidences in the 
bright morning with the terrible recollection of what had happened the evening 
before vivid in my memory. The necessity of sparing Laura any sudden knowledge 
of the truth was the first consideration which the letter suggested to me. I 
wrote at once to Marian to tell her what I have told in these 
pages—presenting the tidings as gradually and gently as I could, and warning 
her not to let any such thing as a newspaper fall in Laura's way while I was 
absent. In the case of any other woman, less courageous and less reliable, I 
might have hesitated before I ventured on unreservedly disclosing the whole 
truth. But I owed it to Marian to be faithful to my past experience of her, and 
to trust her as I trusted herself.

My letter was necessarily a long one. It occupied me until the time came for 
proceeding to the inquest.

The objects of the legal inquiry were necessarily beset by peculiar 
complications and difficulties. Besides the investigation into the manner in 
which the deceased had met his death, there were serious questions to be 
settled relating to the cause of the fire, to the abstraction of the keys, and 
to the presence of a stranger in the vestry at the time when the flames broke 
out. Even the identification of the dead man had not yet been accomplished. The 
helpless condition of the servant had made the police distrustful of his 
asserted recognition of his master. They had sent to Knowlesbury overnight to 
secure the attendance of witnesses who were well acquainted with the personal 
appearance of Sir Percival Glyde, and they had communicated, the first thing in 
the morning, with Blackwater Park. These precautions enabled the coroner and 
jury to settle the question of identity, and to confirm the correctness of the 
servant's assertion; the evidence offered by competent witnesses, and by the 
discovery of certain facts, being subsequently strengthened by an examination 
of the dead man's watch. The crest and the name of Sir Percival Glyde were 
engraved inside it.

The next inquiries related to the fire.

The servant and I, and the boy who had heard the light struck in the vestry, 
were the first witnesses called. The boy gave his evidence clearly enough, but 
the servant's mind had not yet recovered the shock inflicted on it—he was 
plainly incapable of assisting the objects of the inquiry, and he was desired 
to stand down.

To my own relief, my examination was not a long one. I had not known the 
deceased—I had never seen him—I was not aware of his presence at Old 
Welmingham—and I had not been in the vestry at the finding of the body. All I 
could prove was that I had stopped at the clerk's cottage to ask my way—that 
I had heard from him of the loss of the keys—that I had accompanied him to 
the church to render what help I could—that I had seen the fire—that I had 
heard some person unknown, inside the vestry, trying vainly to unlock the 
door—and that I had done what I could, from motives of humanity, to save the 
man. Other witnesses, who had been acquainted with the deceased, were asked if 
they could explain the mystery of his presumed abstraction of the keys, and his 
presence in the burning room. But the coroner seemed to take it for granted, 
naturally enough, that I, as a total stranger in the neighbourhood, and a total 
stranger to Sir Percival Glyde, could not be in a position to offer any 
evidence on these two points.

The course that I was myself bound to take, when my formal examination had 
closed, seemed clear to me. I did not feel called on to volunteer any statement 
of my own private convictions; in the first place, because my doing so could 
serve no practical purpose, now that all proof in support of any surmises of 
mine was burnt with the burnt register; in the second place, because I could 
not have intelligibly stated my opinion—my unsupported opinion—without 
disclosing the whole story of the conspiracy, and producing beyond a doubt the 
same unsatisfactory effect an the minds of the coroner and the jury, which I 
had already produced on the mind of Mr. Kyrle.

In these pages, however, and after the time that has now elapsed, no such 
cautions and restraints as are here described need fetter the free expression 
of my opinion. I will state briefly, before my pen occupies itself with other 
events, how my own convictions lead me to account for the abstraction of the 
keys, for the outbreak of the fire, and for the death of the man.

The news of my being free on bail drove Sir Percival, as I believe, to his last 
resources. The attempted attack on the road was one of those resources, and the 
suppression of all practical proof of his crime, by destroying the page of the 
register on which the forgery had been committed, was the other, and the surest 
of the two. If I could produce no extract from the original book to compare 
with the certified copy at Knowlesbury, I could produce no positive evidence, 
and could threaten him with no fatal exposure. All that was necessary to the 
attainment of his end was, that he should get into the vestry unperceived, that 
he should tear out the page in the register, and that he should leave the 
vestry again as privately as he had entered it.

On this supposition, it is easy to understand why he waited until nightfall 
before he made the attempt, and why he took advantage of the clerk's absence to 
possess himself of the keys. Necessity would oblige him to strike a light to 
find his way to the right register, and common caution would suggest his 
locking the door on the inside in case of intrusion on the part of any 
inquisitive stranger, or on my part, if I happened to be in the neighbourhood 
at the time.

I cannot believe that it was any part of his intention to make the destruction 
of the register appear to be the result of accident, by purposely setting the 
vestry on fire. The bare chance that prompt assistance might arrive, and that 
the books might, by the remotest possibility, be saved, would have been enough, 
on a moment's consideration, to dismiss any idea of this sort from his mind. 
Remembering the quantity of combustible objects in the vestry—the straw, the 
papers, the packing-cases, the dry wood, the old worm-eaten presses—all the 
probabilities, in my estimation, point to the fire as the result of an accident 
with his matches or his light.

His first impulse, under these circumstances, was doubtless to try to 
extinguish the flames, and failing in that, his second impulse (ignorant as he 
was of the state of the lock) had been to attempt to escape by the door which 
had given him entrance. When I had called to him, the flames must have reached 
across the door leading into the church, on either side of which the presses 
extended, and close to which the other combustible objects were placed. In all 
probability, the smoke and flame (confined as they were to the room) had been 
too much for him when he tried to escape by the inner door. He must have 
dropped in his death-swoon—he must have sunk in the place where he was 
found—just as I got on the roof to break the skylight window. Even if we had 
been able, afterwards, to get into the church, and to burst open the door from 
that side, the delay must have been fatal. He would have been past saving, long 
past saving, by that time. We should only have given the flames free ingress 
into the church—the church, which was now preserved, but which, in that 
event, would have shared the fate of the vestry. There is no doubt in my mind, 
there can be no doubt in the mind of any one, that he was a dead man before 
ever we got to the empty cottage, and worked with might and main to tear down 
the beam.

This is the nearest approach that any theory of mine can make towards 
accounting for a result which was visible matter of fact. As I have described 
them, so events passed to us outside. As I have related it, so his body was 
found.



The inquest was adjourned over one day—no explanation that the eye of the law 
could recognise having been discovered thus far to account for the mysterious 
circumstances of the case.

It was arranged that more witnesses should be summoned, and that the London 
solicitor of the deceased should be invited to attend. A medical man was also 
charged with the duty of reporting on the mental condition of the servant, 
which appeared at present to debar him from giving any evidence of the least 
importance. He could only declare, in a dazed way, that he had been ordered, on 
the night of the fire, to wait in the lane, and that he knew nothing else, 
except that the deceased was certainly his master.

My own impression was, that he had been first used (without any guilty 
knowledge on his own part) to ascertain the fact of the clerk's absence from 
home on the previous day, and that he had been afterwards ordered to wait near 
the church (but out of sight of the vestry) to assist his master, in the event 
of my escaping the attack on the road, and of a collision occurring between Sir 
Percival and myself. It is necessary to add, that the man's own testimony was 
never obtained to confirm this view. The medical report of him declared that 
what little mental faculty he possessed was seriously shaken; nothing 
satisfactory was extracted from him at the adjourned inquest, and for aught I 
know to the contrary, he may never have recovered to this day.

I returned to the hotel at Welmingham so jaded in body and mind, so weakened 
and depressed by all that I had gone through, as to be quite unfit to endure 
the local gossip about the inquest, and to answer the trivial questions that 
the talkers addressed to me in the coffee-room. I withdrew from my scanty 
dinner to my cheap garret-chamber to secure myself a little quiet, and to think 
undisturbed of Laura and Marian.

If I had been a richer man I would have gone back to London, and would have 
comforted myself with a sight of the two dear faces again that night. But I was 
bound to appear, if called on, at the adjourned inquest, and doubly bound to 
answer my bail before the magistrate at Knowlesbury. Our slender resources had 
suffered already, and the doubtful future—more doubtful than ever now—made 
me dread decreasing our means unnecessarily by allowing myself an indulgence 
even at the small cost of a double railway journey in the carriages of the 
second class.

The next day—the day immediately following the inquest—was left at my own 
disposal. I began the morning by again applying at the post-office for my 
regular report from Marian. It was waiting for me as before, and it was written 
throughout in good spirits. I read the letter thankfully, and then set forth 
with my mind at ease for the day to go to Old Welmingham, and to view the scene 
of the fire by the morning light.

What changes met me when I got there!

Through all the ways of our unintelligible world the trivial and the terrible 
walk hand in hand together. The irony of circumstances holds no mortal 
catastrophe in respect. When I reached the church, the trampled condition of 
the burial-ground was the only serious trace left to tell of the fire and the 
death. A rough hoarding of boards had been knocked up before the vestry 
doorway. Rude caricatures were scrawled on it already, and the village children 
were fighting and shouting for the possession of the best peep-hole to see 
through. On the spot where I had heard the cry for help from the burning room, 
on the spot where the panic-stricken servant had dropped on his knees, a fussy 
flock of poultry was now scrambling for the first choice of worms after the 
rain; and on the ground at my feet, where the door and its dreadful burden had 
been laid, a workman's dinner was waiting for him, tied up in a yellow basin, 
and his faithful cur in charge was yelping at me for coming near the food. The 
old clerk, looking idly at the slow commencement of the repairs, had only one 
interest that he could talk about now—the interest of escaping all blame for 
his own part on account of the accident that had happened. One of the village 
women, whose white wild face I remembered the picture of terror when we pulled 
down the beam, was giggling with another woman, the picture of inanity, over an 
old washing-tub. There is nothing serious in mortality! Solomon in all his 
glory was Solomon with the elements of the contemptible lurking in every fold 
of his robes and in every corner of his palace.

As I left the place, my thoughts turned, not for the first time, to the 
complete overthrow that all present hope of establishing Laura's identity had 
now suffered through Sir Percival's death. He was gone—and with him the 
chance was gone which had been the one object of all my labours and all my 
hopes.

Could I look at my failure from no truer point of view than this?

Suppose he had lived, would that change of circumstance have altered the 
result? Could I have made my discovery a marketable commodity, even for Laura's 
sake, after I had found out that robbery of the rights of others was the 
essence of Sir Percival's crime? Could I have offered the price of MY silence 
for HIS confession of the conspiracy, when the effect of that silence must have 
been to keep the right heir from the estates, and the right owner from the 
name? Impossible! If Sir Percival had lived, the discovery, from which (In my 
ignorance of the true nature of the Secret) I had hoped so much, could not have 
been mine to suppress or to make public, as I thought best, for the vindication 
of Laura's rights. In common honesty and common honour I must have gone at once 
to the stranger whose birthright had been usurped—I must have renounced the 
victory at the moment when it was mine by placing my discovery unreservedly in 
that stranger's hands—and I must have faced afresh all the difficulties which 
stood between me and the one object of my life, exactly as I was resolved in my 
heart of hearts to face them now!

I returned to Welmingham with my mind composed, feeling more sure of myself and 
my resolution than I had felt yet.

On my way to the hotel I passed the end of the square in which Mrs. Catherick 
lived. Should I go back to the house, and make another attempt to see her. No. 
That news of Sir Percival's death, which was the last news she ever expected to 
hear, must have reached her hours since. All the proceedings at the inquest had 
been reported in the local paper that morning—there was nothing I could tell 
her which she did not know already. My interest in making her speak had 
slackened. I remembered the furtive hatred in her face when she said, "There is 
no news of Sir Percival that I don't expect—except the news of his death." I 
remembered the stealthy interest in her eyes when they settled on me at 
parting, after she had spoken those words. Some instinct, deep in my heart, 
which I felt to be a true one, made the prospect of again entering her presence 
repulsive to me—I turned away from the square, and went straight back to the 
hotel.

Some hours later, while I was resting in the coffee-room, a letter was placed 
in my hands by the waiter. It was addressed to me by name, and I found on 
inquiry that it had been left at the bar by a woman just as it was near dusk, 
and just before the gas was lighted. She had said nothing, and she had gone 
away again before there was time to speak to her, or even to notice who she was.

I opened the letter. It was neither dated nor signed, and the handwriting was 
palpably disguised. Before I had read the first sentence, however, I knew who 
my correspondent was—Mrs. Catherick.

The letter ran as follows—I copy it exactly, word for word:—




THE STORY CONTINUED BY MRS. CATHERICK

SIR,—You have not come back, as you said you would. No matter—I know the 
news, and I write to tell you so. Did you see anything particular in my face 
when you left me? I was wondering, in my own mind, whether the day of his 
downfall had come at last, and whether you were the chosen instrument for 
working it. You were, and you HAVE worked it.

You were weak enough, as I have heard, to try and save his life. If you had 
succeeded, I should have looked upon you as my enemy. Now you have failed, I 
hold you as my friend. Your inquiries frightened him into the vestry by 
night—your inquiries, without your privity and against your will, have served 
the hatred and wreaked the vengeance of three-and-twenty years. Thank you, sir, 
in spite of yourself.

I owe something to the man who has done this. How can I pay my debt? If I was a 
young woman still I might say, "Come, put your arm round my waist, and kiss me, 
if you like." I should have been fond enough of you even to go that length, and 
you would have accepted my invitation—you would, sir, twenty years ago! But I 
am an old woman now. Well! I can satisfy your curiosity, and pay my debt in 
that way. You HAD a great curiosity to know certain private affairs of mine 
when you came to see me—private affairs which all your sharpness could not 
look into without my help—private affairs which you have not discovered, even 
now. You SHALL discover them—your curiosity shall be satisfied. I will take 
any trouble to please you, my estimable young friend!

You were a little boy, I suppose, in the year twenty-seven? I was a handsome 
young woman at that time, living at Old Welmingham. I had a contemptible fool 
for a husband. I had also the honour of being acquainted (never mind how) with 
a certain gentleman (never mind whom). I shall not call him by his name. Why 
should I? It was not his own. He never had a name: you know that, by this time, 
as well as I do.

It will be more to the purpose to tell you how he worked himself into my good 
graces. I was born with the tastes of a lady, and he gratified them—in other 
words, he admired me, and he made me presents. No woman can resist admiration 
and presents—especially presents, provided they happen to be just the thing 
she wants. He was sharp enough to know that—most men are. Naturally he wanted 
something in return—all men do. And what do you think was the something? The 
merest trifle. Nothing but the key of the vestry, and the key of the press 
inside it, when my husband's back was turned. Of course he lied when I asked 
him why he wished me to get him the keys in that private way. He might have 
saved himself the trouble—I didn't believe him. But I liked my presents, and 
I wanted more. So I got him the keys, without my husband's knowledge, and I 
watched him, without his own knowledge. Once, twice, four times I watched him, 
and the fourth time I found him out.

I was never over-scrupulous where other people's affairs were concerned, and I 
was not over-scrupulous about his adding one to the marriages in the register 
on his own account.

Of course I knew it was wrong, but it did no harm to me, which was one good 
reason for not making a fuss about it. And I had not got a gold watch and 
chain, which was another, still better—and he had promised me one from London 
only the day before, which was a third, best of all. If I had known what the 
law considered the crime to be, and how the law punished it, I should have 
taken proper care of myself, and have exposed him then and there. But I knew 
nothing, and I longed for the gold watch. All the conditions I insisted on were 
that he should take me into his confidence and tell me everything. I was as 
curious about his affairs then as you are about mine now. He granted my 
conditions—why, you will see presently.

This, put in short, is what I heard from him. He did not willingly tell me all 
that I tell you here. I drew some of it from him by persuasion and some of it 
by questions. I was determined to have all the truth, and I believe I got it.

He knew no more than any one else of what the state of things really was 
between his father and mother till after his mother's death. Then his father 
confessed it, and promised to do what he could for his son. He died having done 
nothing—not having even made a will. The son (who can blame him?) wisely 
provided for himself. He came to England at once, and took possession of the 
property. There was no one to suspect him, and no one to say him nay. His 
father and mother had always lived as man and wife—none of the few people who 
were acquainted with them ever supposed them to be anything else. The right 
person to claim the property (if the truth had been known) was a distant 
relation, who had no idea of ever getting it, and who was away at sea when his 
father died. He had no difficulty so far—he took possession, as a matter of 
course. But he could not borrow money on the property as a matter of course. 
There were two things wanted of him before he could do this. One was a 
certificate of his birth, and the other was a certificate of his parents' 
marriage. The certificate of his birth was easily got—he was born abroad, and 
the certificate was there in due form. The other matter was a difficulty, and 
that difficulty brought him to Old Welmingham.

But for one consideration he might have gone to Knowlesbury instead.

His mother had been living there just before she met with his father—living 
under her maiden name, the truth being that she was really a married woman, 
married in Ireland, where her husband had ill-used her, and had afterwards gone 
off with some other person. I give you this fact on good authority—Sir Felix 
mentioned it to his son as the reason why he had not married. You may wonder 
why the son, knowing that his parents had met each other at Knowlesbury, did 
not play his first tricks with the register of that church, where it might have 
been fairly presumed his father and mother were married. The reason was that 
the clergyman who did duty at Knowlesbury church, in the year eighteen hundred 
and three (when, according to his birth certificate, his father and mother 
OUGHT to have been married), was alive still when he took possession of the 
property in the New Year of eighteen hundred and twenty-seven. This awkward 
circumstance forced him to extend his inquiries to our neighbourhood. There no 
such danger existed, the former clergyman at our church having been dead for 
some years.

Old Welmingham suited his purpose as well as Knowlesbury. His father had 
removed his mother from Knowlesbury, and had lived with her at a cottage on the 
river, a little distance from our village. People who had known his solitary 
ways when he was single did not wonder at his solitary ways when he was 
supposed to be married. If he had not been a hideous creature to look at, his 
retired life with the lady might have raised suspicions; but, as things were, 
his hiding his ugliness and his deformity in the strictest privacy surprised 
nobody. He lived in our neighbourhood till he came in possession of the Park. 
After three or four and twenty years had passed, who was to say (the clergyman 
being dead) that his marriage had not been as private as the rest of his life, 
and that it had not taken place at Old Welmingham church?

So, as I told you, the son found our neighbourhood the surest place he could 
choose to set things right secretly in his own interests. It may surprise you 
to hear that what he really did to the marriage register was done on the spur 
of the moment—done on second thoughts.

His first notion was only to tear the leaf out (in the right year and month), 
to destroy it privately, to go back to London, and to tell the lawyers to get 
him the necessary certificate of his father's marriage, innocently referring 
them of course to the date on the leaf that was gone. Nobody could say his 
father and mother had NOT been married after that, and whether, under the 
circumstances, they would stretch a point or not about lending him the money 
(he thought they would), he had his answer ready at all events, if a question 
was ever raised about his right to the name and the estate.

But when he came to look privately at the register for himself, he found at the 
bottom of one of the pages for the year eighteen hundred and three a blank 
space left, seemingly through there being no room to make a long entry there, 
which was made instead at the top of the next page. The sight of this chance 
altered all his plans. It was an opportunity he had never hoped for, or thought 
of—and he took it—you know how. The blank space, to have exactly tallied 
with his birth certificate, ought to have occurred in the July part of the 
register. It occurred in the September part instead. However, in this case, if 
suspicious questions were asked, the answer was not hard to find. He had only 
to describe himself as a seven months' child.

I was fool enough, when he told me his story, to feel some interest and some 
pity for him—which was just what he calculated on, as you will see. I thought 
him hardly used. It was not his fault that his father and mother were not 
married, and it was not his father's and mother's fault either. A more 
scrupulous woman than I was—a woman who had not set her heart on a gold watch 
and chain—would have found some excuses for him. At all events, I held my 
tongue, and helped to screen what he was about.

He was some time getting the ink the right colour (mixing it over and over 
again in pots and bottles of mine), and some time afterwards in practising the 
handwriting. But he succeeded in the end, and made an honest woman of his 
mother after she was dead in her grave! So far, I don't deny that he behaved 
honourably enough to myself. He gave me my watch and chain, and spared no 
expense in buying them; both were of superior workmanship, and very expensive. 
I have got them still—the watch goes beautifully.

You said the other day that Mrs. Clements had told you everything she knew. In 
that case there is no need for me to write about the trumpery scandal by which 
I was the sufferer—the innocent sufferer, I positively assert. You must know 
as well as I do what the notion was which my husband took into his head when he 
found me and my fine-gentleman acquaintance meeting each other privately and 
talking secrets together. But what you don't know is how it ended between that 
same gentleman and myself. You shall read and see how he behaved to me.

The first words I said to him, when I saw the turn things had taken, were, "Do 
me justice—clear my character of a stain on it which you know I don't 
deserve. I don't want you to make a clean breast of it to my husband—only 
tell him, on your word of honour as a gentleman, that he is wrong, and that I 
am not to blame in the way he thinks I am. Do me that justice, at least, after 
all I have done for you." He flatly refused, in so many words. He told me 
plainly that it was his interest to let my husband and all my neighbours 
believe the falsehood—because, as long as they did so they were quite certain 
never to suspect the truth. I had a spirit of my own, and I told him they 
should know the truth from my lips. His reply was short, and to the point. If I 
spoke, I was a lost woman, as certainly as he was a lost man.

Yes! it had come to that. He had deceived me about the risk I ran in helping 
him. He had practised on my ignorance, he had tempted me with his gifts, he had 
interested me with his story—and the result of it was that he made me his 
accomplice. He owned this coolly, and he ended by telling me, for the first 
time, what the frightful punishment really was for his offence, and for any one 
who helped him to commit it. In those days the law was not so tender-hearted as 
I hear it is now. Murderers were not the only people liable to be hanged, and 
women convicts were not treated like ladies in undeserved distress. I confess 
he frightened me—the mean impostor! the cowardly blackguard! Do you 
understand now how I hated him? Do you understand why I am taking all this 
trouble—thankfully taking it—to gratify the curiosity of the meritorious 
young gentleman who hunted him down?

Well, to go on. He was hardly fool enough to drive me to downright desperation. 
I was not the sort of woman whom it was quite safe to hunt into a corner—he 
knew that, and wisely quieted me with proposals for the future.

I deserved some reward (he was kind enough to say) for the service I had done 
him, and some compensation (he was so obliging as to add) for what I had 
suffered. He was quite willing—generous scoundrel!—to make me a handsome 
yearly allowance, payable quarterly, on two conditions. First, I was to hold my 
tongue—in my own interests as well as in his. Secondly, I was not to stir 
away from Welmingham without first letting him know, and waiting till I had 
obtained his permission. In my own neighbourhood, no virtuous female friends 
would tempt me into dangerous gossiping at the tea-table. In my own 
neighbourhood, he would always know where to find me. A hard condition, that 
second one—but I accepted it.

What else was I to do? I was left helpless, with the prospect of a coming 
incumbrance in the shape of a child. What else was I to do? Cast myself on the 
mercy of my runaway idiot of a husband who had raised the scandal against me? I 
would have died first. Besides, the allowance WAS a handsome one. I had a 
better income, a better house over my head, better carpets on my floors, than 
half the women who turned up the whites of their eyes at the sight of me. The 
dress of Virtue, in our parts, was cotton print. I had silk.

So I accepted the conditions he offered me, and made the best of them, and 
fought my battle with my respectable neighbours on their own ground, and won it 
in course of time—as you saw yourself. How I kept his Secret (and mine) 
through all the years that have passed from that time to this, and whether my 
late daughter, Anne, ever really crept into my confidence, and got the keeping 
of the Secret too—are questions, I dare say, to which you are curious to find 
an answer. Well! my gratitude refuses you nothing. I will turn to a fresh page 
and give you the answer immediately. But you must excuse one thing—you must 
excuse my beginning, Mr. Hartright, with an expression of surprise at the 
interest which you appear to have felt in my late daughter. It is quite 
unaccountable to me. If that interest makes you anxious for any particulars of 
her early life, I must refer you to Mrs. Clements, who knows more of the 
subject than I do. Pray understand that I do not profess to have been at all 
overfond of my late daughter. She was a worry to me from first to last, with 
the additional disadvantage of being always weak in the head. You like candour, 
and I hope this satisfies you.

There is no need to trouble you with many personal particulars relating to 
those past times. It will be enough to say that I observed the terms of the 
bargain on my side, and that I enjoyed my comfortable income in return, paid 
quarterly.

Now and then I got away and changed the scene for a short time, always asking 
leave of my lord and master first, and generally getting it. He was not, as I 
have already told you, fool enough to drive me too hard, and he could 
reasonably rely on my holding my tongue for my own sake, if not for his. One of 
my longest trips away from home was the trip I took to Limmeridge to nurse a 
half-sister there, who was dying. She was reported to have saved money, and I 
thought it as well (in case any accident happened to stop my allowance) to look 
after my own interests in that direction. As things turned out, however, my 
pains were all thrown away, and I got nothing, because nothing was to be had.

I had taken Anne to the north with me, having my whims and fancies, 
occasionally, about my child, and getting, at such times, jealous of Mrs. 
Clements' influence over her. I never liked Mrs. Clements. She was a poor, 
empty-headed, spiritless woman—what you call a born drudge—and I was now 
and then not averse to plaguing her by taking Anne away. Not knowing what else 
to do with my girl while I was nursing in Cumberland, I put her to school at 
Limmeridge. The lady of the manor, Mrs. Fairlie (a remarkably plain-looking 
woman, who had entrapped one of the handsomest men in England into marrying 
her), amused me wonderfully by taking a violent fancy to my girl. The 
consequence was, she learnt nothing at school, and was petted and spoilt at 
Limmeridge House. Among other whims and fancies which they taught her there, 
they put some nonsense into her head about always wearing white. Hating white 
and liking colours myself, I determined to take the nonsense out of her head as 
soon as we got home again.

Strange to say, my daughter resolutely resisted me. When she HAD got a notion 
once fixed in her mind she was, like other half-witted people, as obstinate as 
a mule in keeping it. We quarrelled finely, and Mrs. Clements, not liking to 
see it, I suppose, offered to take Anne away to live in London with her. I 
should have said Yes, if Mrs. Clements had not sided with my daughter about her 
dressing herself in white. But being determined she should NOT dress herself in 
white, and disliking Mrs. Clements more than ever for taking part against me, I 
said No, and meant No, and stuck to No. The consequence was, my daughter 
remained with me, and the consequence of that, in its turn, was the first 
serious quarrel that happened about the Secret.

The circumstance took place long after the time I have just been writing of. I 
had been settled for years in the new town, and was steadily living down my bad 
character and slowly gaining ground among the respectable inhabitants. It 
helped me forward greatly towards this object to have my daughter with me. Her 
harmlessness and her fancy for dressing in white excited a certain amount of 
sympathy. I left off opposing her favourite whim on that account, because some 
of the sympathy was sure, in course of time, to fall to my share. Some of it 
did fall. I date my getting a choice of the two best sittings to let in the 
church from that time, and I date the clergyman's first bow from my getting the 
sittings.

Well, being settled in this way, I received a letter one morning from that 
highly born gentleman (now deceased) in answer to one of mine, warning him, 
according to agreement, of my wishing to leave the town for a little change of 
air and scene.

The ruffianly side of him must have been uppermost, I suppose, when he got my 
letter, for he wrote back, refusing me in such abominably insolent language, 
that I lost all command over myself, and abused him, in my daughter's presence, 
as "a low impostor whom I could ruin for life if I chose to open my lips and 
let out his Secret." I said no more about him than that, being brought to my 
senses as soon as those words had escaped me by the sight of my daughter's face 
looking eagerly and curiously at mine. I instantly ordered her out of the room 
until I had composed myself again.

My sensations were not pleasant, I can tell you, when I came to reflect on my 
own folly. Anne had been more than usually crazy and queer that year, and when 
I thought of the chance there might be of her repeating my words in the town, 
and mentioning HIS name in connection with them, if inquisitive people got hold 
of her, I was finely terrified at the possible consequences. My worst fears for 
myself, my worst dread of what he might do, led me no farther than this. I was 
quite unprepared for what really did happen only the next day.

On that next day, without any warning to me to expect him, he came to the house.

His first words, and the tone in which he spoke them, surly as it was, showed 
me plainly enough that he had repented already of his insolent answer to my 
application, and that he had come in a mighty bad temper to try and set matters 
right again before it was too late. Seeing my daughter in the room with me (I 
had been afraid to let her out of my sight after what had happened the day 
before) he ordered her away. They neither of them liked each other, and he 
vented the ill-temper on HER which he was afraid to show to ME.

"Leave us," he said, looking at her over his shoulder. She looked back over HER 
shoulder and waited as if she didn't care to go. "Do you hear?" he roared out, 
"leave the room." "Speak to me civilly," says she, getting red in the face. 
"Turn the idiot out," says he, looking my way. She had always had crazy notions 
of her own about her dignity, and that word "idiot" upset her in a moment. 
Before I could interfere she stepped up to him in a fine passion. "Beg my 
pardon, directly," says she, "or I'll make it the worse for you. I'll let out 
your Secret. I can ruin you for life if I choose to open my lips." My own 
words!—repeated exactly from what I had said the day before—repeated, in 
his presence, as if they had come from herself. He sat speechless, as white as 
the paper I am writing on, while I pushed her out of the room. When he 
recovered himself——

No! I am too respectable a woman to mention what he said when he recovered 
himself. My pen is the pen of a member of the rector's congregation, and a 
subscriber to the "Wednesday Lectures on Justification by Faith"—how can you 
expect me to employ it in writing bad language? Suppose, for yourself, the 
raging, swearing frenzy of the lowest ruffian in England, and let us get on 
together, as fast as may be, to the way in which it all ended.

It ended, as you probably guess by this time, in his insisting on securing his 
own safety by shutting her up.

I tried to set things right. I told him that she had merely repeated, like a 
parrot, the words she had heard me say and that she knew no particulars 
whatever, because I had mentioned none. I explained that she had affected, out 
of crazy spite against him, to know what she really did NOT know—that she 
only wanted to threaten him and aggravate him for speaking to her as he had 
just spoken—and that my unlucky words gave her just the chance of doing 
mischief of which she was in search. I referred him to other queer ways of 
hers, and to his own experience of the vagaries of half-witted people—it was 
all to no purpose—he would not believe me on my oath—he was absolutely 
certain I had betrayed the whole Secret. In short, he would hear of nothing but 
shutting her up.

Under these circumstances, I did my duty as a mother. "No pauper Asylum," I 
said, "I won't have her put in a pauper Asylum. A Private Establishment, if you 
please. I have my feelings as a mother, and my character to preserve in the 
town, and I will submit to nothing but a Private Establishment, of the sort 
which my genteel neighbours would choose for afflicted relatives of their own." 
Those were my words. It is gratifying to me to reflect that I did my duty. 
Though never overfond of my late daughter, I had a proper pride about her. No 
pauper stain—thanks to my firmness and resolution—ever rested on MY child.

Having carried my point (which I did the more easily, in consequence of the 
facilities offered by private Asylums), I could not refuse to admit that there 
were certain advantages gained by shutting her up. In the first place, she was 
taken excellent care of—being treated (as I took care to mention in the town) 
on the footing of a lady. In the second place, she was kept away from 
Welmingham, where she might have set people suspecting and inquiring, by 
repeating my own incautious words.

The only drawback of putting her under restraint was a very slight one. We 
merely turned her empty boast about knowing the Secret into a fixed delusion. 
Having first spoken in sheer crazy spitefulness against the man who had 
offended her, she was cunning enough to see that she had seriously frightened 
him, and sharp enough afterwards to discover that HE was concerned in shutting 
her up. The consequence was she flamed out into a perfect frenzy of passion 
against him, going to the Asylum, and the first words she said to the nurses, 
after they had quieted her, were, that she was put in confinement for knowing 
his Secret, and that she meant to open her lips and ruin him, when the right 
time came.

She may have said the same thing to you, when you thoughtlessly assisted her 
escape. She certainly said it (as I heard last summer) to the unfortunate woman 
who married our sweet-tempered, nameless gentleman lately deceased. If either 
you, or that unlucky lady, had questioned my daughter closely, and had insisted 
on her explaining what she really meant, you would have found her lose all her 
self-importance suddenly, and get vacant, and restless, and confused—you 
would have discovered that I am writing nothing here but the plain truth. She 
knew that there was a Secret—she knew who was connected with it—she knew 
who would suffer by its being known—and beyond that, whatever airs of 
importance she may have given herself, whatever crazy boasting she may have 
indulged in with strangers, she never to her dying day knew more.

Have I satisfied your curiosity? I have taken pains enough to satisfy it at any 
rate. There is really nothing else I have to tell you about myself or my 
daughter. My worst responsibilities, so far as she was concerned, were all over 
when she was secured in the Asylum. I had a form of letter relating to the 
circumstances under which she was shut up, given me to write, in answer to one 
Miss Halcombe, who was curious in the matter, and who must have heard plenty of 
lies about me from a certain tongue well accustomed to the telling of the same. 
And I did what I could afterwards to trace my runaway daughter, and prevent her 
from doing mischief by making inquiries myself in the neighbourhood where she 
was falsely reported to have been seen. But these, and other trifles like them, 
are of little or no interest to you after what you have heard already.

So far, I have written in the friendliest possible spirit. But I cannot close 
this letter without adding a word here of serious remonstrance and reproof, 
addressed to yourself.

In the course of your personal interview with me, you audaciously referred to 
my late daughter's parentage on the father's side, as if that parentage was a 
matter of doubt. This was highly improper and very ungentlemanlike on your 
part! If we see each other again, remember, if you please, that I will allow no 
liberties to be taken with my reputation, and that the moral atmosphere of 
Welmingham (to use a favourite expression of my friend the rector's) must not 
be tainted by loose conversation of any kind. If you allow yourself to doubt 
that my husband was Anne's father, you personally insult me in the grossest 
manner. If you have felt, and if you still continue to feel, an unhallowed 
curiosity on this subject, I recommend you, in your own interests, to check it 
at once, and for ever. On this side of the grave, Mr. Hartright, whatever may 
happen on the other, THAT curiosity will never be gratified.

Perhaps, after what I have just said, you will see the necessity of writing me 
an apology. Do so, and I will willingly receive it. I will, afterwards, if your 
wishes point to a second interview with me, go a step farther, and receive you. 
My circumstances only enable me to invite you to tea—not that they are at all 
altered for the worse by what has happened. I have always lived, as I think I 
told you, well within my income, and I have saved enough, in the last twenty 
years, to make me quite comfortable for the rest of my life. It is not my 
intention to leave Welmingham. There are one or two little advantages which I 
have still to gain in the town. The clergyman bows to me—as you saw. He is 
married, and his wife is not quite so civil. I propose to join the Dorcas 
Society, and I mean to make the clergyman's wife bow to me next.

If you favour me with your company, pray understand that the conversation must 
be entirely on general subjects. Any attempted reference to this letter will be 
quite useless—I am determined not to acknowledge having written it. The 
evidence has been destroyed in the fire, I know, but I think it desirable to 
err on the side of caution, nevertheless.

On this account no names are mentioned here, nor is any signature attached to 
these lines: the handwriting is disguised throughout, and I mean to deliver the 
letter myself, under circumstances which will prevent all fear of its being 
traced to my house. You can have no possible cause to complain of these 
precautions, seeing that they do not affect the information I here communicate, 
in consideration of the special indulgence which you have deserved at my hands. 
My hour for tea is half-past five, and my buttered toast waits for nobody.




THE STORY CONTINUED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT


