of Chambermaids. The heroic Temper of Sophia. Her Generasity. The Return to it.
The Departure of the Company, and their Arrival at London; with some Remarks
for the Use of Travelers. p. 330 CHAP. X. Containing a Hint or two concerning
Virtue, and a few more concerning Suspicion. p. 335
BOOK XII. Containing the same individual Time with the former.
CHAP. I. Showing what is to be deemed Plagiarism in a modern Author, and what
is to be considered as lawful Prize. p. 341 CHAP. II. In which though the Squire
does not find his Daughter, something is found which puts an End to his
Pursuit. p. 344 CHAP. III. The Departure of Jones from Upton, with what past
between him and Partridge on the Road. p. 349 CHAP. IV. The Adventure of a
Beggar-Man. p. 355 CHAP. V. Containing more Adventures which Mr. Jones and his
Companion met on the Road. p. 360 CHAP. VI. From which it may be inferred, that
the best Things are liable to be misunderstood and misinterpreted. p. 365 CHAP.
VII. Containing a Remark or two of our own, and many more of the good Company
assembled in the Kitchen. p. 369 CHAP. VIII. In which Fortune seems to have
been in a better Humor with Jones than we have hitherto seen her. p. 375 CHAP.
IX. Containing little more than a few odd Observations. p. 380. CHAP. X. In
which Mr. Jones and Mr. Dowling drink a Bottle together. p. 384 CHAP. XI. The
Disasters which befell Jones on his Departure for Coventry; with the sage
Remarks of Partridge. p. 390 CHAP. XII. Relates that Mr. Jones continued his
Journey contrary to the Advice of Partridge, with what happened on that
Occasion. p. 393 CHAP. XIII. A Dialogue between Jones and Partridge. p. 404
CHAP. XIV. What happened to Mr. Jones in his Journey from St. Albans. p. 410
THE HISTORY. OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK VII. Containing three Days.
CHAP. I. A Comparison between the World and the Stage.
THE World has been often compared to the Theater; and many grave Writers, as
well as the Poets, have considered human Life as a great Drama, resembling, in
almost every Particular, those scenical Representations, which Thespis is first
reported to have invented, and which have been since received with so much
Approbation and Delight in all polite Countries.

This Thought has been carried so far, and become so general, that some Words
proper to the Theater, and which were, at first, metaphorically applied to the
World, are now indiscriminately and literally spoken of both: Thus Stage and
Scene are by common Use grown as familiar to us, when we speak of Life in
general, as when we confine ourselves to dramatic Performances; and when we
mention Transactions behind the Curtain, St. James's is more likely to occur to
our Thoughts than Drury Lane.

It may seem easy enough to account for all this, by reflecting that the
theatrical Stage is nothing more than a Representation, or, as Aristotle calls
it, an Imitation of what really exists; and hence, perhaps, we might fairly pay
a very high Compliment to those, who by their Writings or Actions have been so
capable of imitating Life, as to have their Pictures, in a Manner confounded
with, or mistaken for the Originals.

But, in Reality, we are not so fond of paying Compliments to these People,
whom we use as Children frequently do the Instruments of their Amusements; and
have much more Pleasure in hissing and buffeting them, than in admiring their
Excellence. There are many other Reasons which have induced us to see this
Analogy between the World and the Stage.

Some have considered the larger Part of Mankind in the light of Actors, as
personating Characters no more their own, and to which, in Fact, they have no
better Title, than the Player has to be in Earnest thought the King or Emperor
whom he represents. Thus the Hypocrite may be said to be a Player; and indeed
the Greeks called them both by one and the same Name.

The Brevity of Life has likewise given Occasion to this Comparison. So the
immortal Shakespeare.

-- Life's a poor Player,
That storms and struts his Hour upon the Stage,
And then is heard no more.
For which hackneyed Quotation, I will make the Reader Amends by a very noble
one, which few, I believe, have read. It is taken from a Poem called the DEITY,
published about nine Years ago, and long since buried in Oblivion. A Proof that
good Books no more than good Men do always survive the bad.

From thee The DEITY.
all human Actions take their Spring
The rise of Empires, and the Fall of Kings!
See the VAST THEATER OF TIME displayed,
While over the Scene succeeding Heraes tread!
With Pomp the shining Images succeed,
What Leaders triumph, and what Monarchs bleed!
Perform the Parts thy Providence assigned,
Their Pride their Passions to thy Ends inclined:
A while they glitter in the Face of Day,
Then at thy Nod the Phantoms pass away;
No Traces left of all the busy Scene,
But that Remembrance says -- THE THINGS HAVE BEEN!
In all these, however, and in every other Similitude of Life to the Theater,
the Resemblance has been always taken from the Stage only. None, as I
remember, have at all considered the Audience at this great Drama.

But as nature often exhibits some of her best Performances to a very full
House; so will the Behavior of our Spectators no less admit the above
mentioned Comparison than that of her Actors. In this vast Theater of Time are
seated the Friend and the Critic; here are Claps and Shouts, Hisses and Groans;
in short, every Thing which was ever seen or heard at the Theater Royal.

Let us examine this in one Example: For Instance, in the Behavior of the
great Audience on that Scene which Nature was pleased to exhibit in the 12th
Chapter of the preceding Book, where she introduced Black George running away
with the 500l. from his Friend and Benefactor.

Those who sat in the World's upper Gallery, treated that Incident, I am well
convinced, with their usual Vociferation; and every Term of scurrilous Reproach
was most probably vented on that Occasion.

If we had descended to the next Order of Spectators, we should have found an
equal Degree of Abhorrence, though less of Noise and Scurrility; yet here the
good Women gave Black George to the Devil, and many of them expected every
Minute that the cloven-footed Gentleman would fetch his own.

The Pit, as usual, was no doubt divided: Those who delight in heroic Virtue
and perfect Character, objected to the producing such Instances of Villainy,
without punishing them very severely for the Sake of Example. Some of the
Author's Friends, cried -- 'Look'e, Gentlemen, the Man is a Villain; but it is
Nature for all that.' And all the young Critics of the Age, the Clerks,
Apprentices, etc. called it Low, and fell a Groaning.

As for the Boxes, they behaved with their accustomed Politeness. Most of them
were attending to something else. Some of those few who regarded the Scene at
all, declared he was a bad Kind of Man; while others refused to give their
opinion 'till they had heard the best Judges.

Now we, who are admitted behind the Scenes of this great Theater of Nature,
(and no Author ought to write any Thing besides Dictionaries and Spelling-Books
who has not this Privilege) can censure the Action, without conceiving any
absolute Detestation of the Person, whom perhaps Nature may not have designed
to act an ill Part in all her Dramas: For in this Instance, Life most exactly
resembles the Stage, since it is often the same Person who represents the
Villain and the Hero; and he who engages your Admiration Today, will probably
attract your Contempt Tomorrow. As Garrick, whom I regard in Tragedy to be the
greatest Genius the World has ever produced, sometimes condescends to play the
Fool; so did Scipio the Great and Laelius the Wise, according to Horace, many
Years ago: nay, Cicero reports them to have been 'incredibly childish.' --
These, it is true played the Fool, like my Friend Garrick, in Jest only; but
several eminent Characters have, in numberless Instances of their Lives, played
the Fool egregiously in Earnest; so far as to render it a Matter of some Doubt,
whether their Wisdom or Folly was predominant; or whether they were better
entitled to the Applause or Censure, the Admiration or Contempt, the Love or
Hatred of Mankind.

Those Persons, indeed, who have passed any Time behind the Scenes of this
great Theater, and are thoroughly acquainted not only with the several
Disguises which are there put on, but also with the fantastic and capricious
Behavior of the Passions who are the Managers and Directors of this Theater,
(for as to Reason the Patentee, he is known to be a very idle Fellow, and
seldom to exert himself) may most probably have learned to construe the famous
Nil admirari of Horace, or in the English Phrase, To stare at nothing.

A single bad Act no more constitutes a Villain in Life, than a single bad Part
on the Stage. The Passions, like the Managers of a Playhouse, often force Men
upon Parts, without consulting their Judgment, and sometimes without any Regard
to their Talents. Thus the Man, as well as the Player, may condemn what he
himself acts; nay, it is common to see Vice sit as awkwardly on some Men, as
the Character of Iago would on the honest Face of Mr. William Mills.

Upon the whole then, the Man of Candor and of true Understanding, is never
hasty to condemn. He can censure an Imperfection, or even a Vice, without Rage
against the guilty Party. In a Word, they are the same Folly, the same
Childishness, the same Ill-breeding, and the same Ill Nature, which raise all
the Clamours and Uproars both in Life and on the Stage. The worst of Men
generally have the Words Rogue and Villain most in their Mouths, as the lowest
of all Wretches are the aptest to cry out low in the Pit.

CHAP. II. Containing a Conversation which Mr. Jones had with himself.
JONES received his Effects from Mr. Allworthy's early in the Morning, with the
following Answer to his Letter.

SIR,
I AM commanded by my Uncle to acquaint you, that as he did not proceed to
those Measures he has taken with you, without the greatest Deliberation, and
after the fullest Evidence of your Unworthiness, so will it be always out of
your Power to cause the least Alteration in his Resolution. He expresses great
Surprise at your Presumption in saying, you have resigned all Pretensions to a
young Lady, to whom it is impossible you should ever have had any, her Birth
and Fortune having made her so infinitely your superior. Lastly, I am commanded
to tell you, that the only instance of your Compliance with my Uncle's
Inclinations, which he requires, is, your immediately quitting this Country. I
cannot conclude this without offering you my Advice, as a Christian, that you
would seriously think of amending your Life; that you may be assisted with
Grace so to do, will be always the Prayer of

Your Humble Servant, W. BLIFIL.


Many contending Passions were raised in our Hero's Mind by this Letter; but
the Tender prevailed at last over the Indignant and Irascible, and a Flood of
Tears came seasonably to his Assistance, and possibly prevented his Misfortunes
from either turning his Head, or bursting his Heart.

He grew, however soon ashamed of indulging this Remedy; and starting up, he
cried, 'Well then, I will give Mr. Allworthy the only Instance he requires of
my Obedience. I will go this Moment -- but whither? -- why let Fortune direct;
since there is no other who thinks it of any Consequence what becomes of this
wretched Person, it shall be a Matter of equal Indifference to myself. Shall I
alone regard what no other? -- Ha! have I not Reason to think there is another?
-- One whose Value is above that of the whole World! -- I may, I must imagine
my Sophia is not indifferent to what becomes of me. Shall I then leave this
only Friend -- and such a Friend? Shall I not stay with her? -- Where? How can
I stay with her? Have I any Hopes of even seeing her, though she was as desirous
as myself, without exposing her to the Wrath of her Father? And to what
Purpose? Can I think of soliciting such a Creature to Consent to her own Ruin?
Shall I indulge any Passion of mine at such a Price? -- Shall I lurk about this
Country like a Thief, with such Intentions? -- No, I disdain, I detest the
Thought. Farewell, Sophia; farewell most lovely, most beloved -- ' Here Passion
stopped his Mouth, and found a Vent at his Eyes.

And now, having taken a Resolution to leave the Country, he began to debate
with himself whither he should go. The World, as Milton phrases it, lay all
before him; and Jones no more than Adam, had any Man to whom he might resort
for Comfort or Assistance. All his Acquaintance were the Acquaintance of Mr.
Allworthy, and he had no Reason to expect any Countenance from them, as that
Gentleman had withdrawn his Favor from him. Men of great and good Characters
should indeed be very cautious how they discard their Dependents; for the
Consequence to the unhappy Sufferer is being discarded by all others.

What Course of Life to pursue, or to what Business to apply himself, was a
second Consideration; and here the Prospect was all a melancholy Void. Every
profession, and every Trade, required Length of Time, and what was worse,
Money; for Matters are so Constituted that 'Nothing out of Nothing' is not a
truer Maxim in Physics than in Politics; and every Man who is greatly destitute
of Money is on that Account entirely excluded from all Means of acquiring it.

At last the Ocean, that hospitable Friend to the Wretched, opened her
capacious Arms to receive him; and he instantly resolved to accept her kind
Invitation. To express myself less figuratively, he determined to go to Sea.

This Thought indeed no sooner suggested itself, than he eagerly embraced it;
and having presently hired Horses, he set out for Bristol to put it in
Execution.

But before we attend him on his Expedition, we shall resort a while to Mr.
Western's, and see what farther happened to the charming Sophia.

CHAP. III. Containing several Dialogues.
THE Morning in which Mr. Jones departed, Mrs. Western summoned Sophia into her
Apartment, and having first accquainted her that she had obtained her Liberty
of her Father, she proceeded to read her a long Lecture on the Subject of
Matrimony; which she treated not as a romantic Scheme of Happiness arising from
Love, as it has been described by the Poets; nor did she mention any of those
Purposes for which we are taught by Divines to regard it as instituted by
sacred Authority; she considered it rather as a Fund in which prudent Women
deposited their Fortunes to the best Advantage, in order to receive a larger
Interest for them, than they could have elsewhere.

When Mrs. Western had finished, Sophia answered, 'that she was very incapable
of arguing with a Lady of her Aunt's superior Knowledge and Experience,
especially on a Subject which she had so very little considered, as this of
Matrimony.'

'Argue with me, Child!' replied the other, 'I did not indeed expect it. I
should have seen the World to very little Purpose truly, if I am to argue with
one of your Years. I have taken this Trouble, in order to instruct you. The
ancient Philosophers, such as Socrates, Alcibiades, and others, did not use to
argue with their Scholars. You are to consider me, Child, as Socrates, not
asking your Opinion, but only informing you of mine.' From which last Words the
Reader may possibly imagine, that this Lady had read no more of the Philosophy
of Socrates, than she had of that of Alcibiades; and indeed we cannot resolve
his Curiosity as to this Point.

'Madam,' cries Sophia, 'I have never presumed to controvert any Opinion of
yours, and this Subject, as I said, I have never yet thought of, and perhaps
never may.

'Indeed Sophy,' replied the Aunt, 'this Dissimulation with me is very foolish.
The French shall as soon persuade me, that they take foreign Towns in Defense
only of their own Country, as you can impose on me to believe you have never
yet thought seriously of Matrimony. How can you, Child, affect to deny that you
have considered of contracting an Alliance, when you so well know I am
acquainted with the Party with whom you desire to contract it. An Alliance as
unnatural, and contrary to your Interest, as a separate League with the French
would be to the Interest of the Dutch! But however, if you have not hitherto
considered of this Matter, I promise you it is now high Time; for my Brother is
resolved immediately to conclude the Treaty with Mr. Blifil; and indeed I am a
sort of Guarantee in the Affair, and have promised your Concurrence.

'Indeed, Madam,' cries Sophia, 'this is the only Instance in which I must
disobey both yourself and my Father. For this is a Match which requires very
little Consideration in me to refuse.'

'If I was not as great a Philosopher as Socrates himself,' returned Mrs.
Western, 'you would overcome my Patience. What Objection can you have to the
young Gentleman?

'A very solid Objection, in my Opinion,' says Sophia, -- 'I hate him.'

'Will you never learn a proper Use of Words?' answered the Aunt. 'Indeed
Child, you should consult Bailey's Dictionary. It is impossible you should hate
a Man from whom you have received no Injury. By Hatred, therefore, you mean no
more than Dislike, which is no sufficient Objection against marrying of him. I
have known many Couples, who have entirely disliked each other, lead very
comfortable, genteel lives. Believe me, Child, I know these Things better than
you. You will allow me, I think, to have seen the World, in which I have not an
Acquaintance who would not rather be thought to dislike her Husband, than to
like him. The contrary is such out-of-Fashion romantic Nonsense, that the very
imagination of it is shocking.

'Indeed, Madam,' replied Sophia, 'I shall never marry a Man I dislike. If I
promise my Father never to consent to any Marriage contrary to his
Inclinations, I think I may hope he will never force me into that State
contrary to my own.

'Inclinations!' cries the Aunt with some Warmth. 'Inclinations! I am
astonished at your assurance. A young Woman of your Age, and unmarried, to talk
of Inclinations! But whatever your Inclinations may be, my Brothar is resolved;
nay, since you talk of Inclinations, I shall advise him to hasten the Treaty.
Inclinations!

Sophia then flung herself upon her Knees, and Tears began to trickle from her
shining Eyes. She entreated her Aunt, 'to have Mercy upon her, and not to
resent so cruelly her Unwillingness to make herself miserable; often urging
that she alone was concerned, and that her Happiness only was at Stake.'

As a Bailiff, when well authorized by his Writ, having possessed himself of
the Person of some unhappy Debtor, views all his Tears without concern: In vain
the wretched Captive attempts to raise Compassion; in vain the tender Wife
bereft of her Companion, the little prattling Boy, or frighted Girl, are
mentioned as inducements to Reluctance. The noble Bumtrap, blind and deaf, to
every Circumstance of Distress, greatly rises above all the Motives to
Humanity, and into the Hands of the Jailer resolves to deliver his miserable
Prey.

Not less blind to the Tears, or less deaf to every Entreaty of Sophia was the
politic Aunt, nor less determined was she to deliver over the trembling Maid
into the Arms of the Jailer Blifil. She answered with great Impetuosity, 'So
far, Madam, from your being concerned alone, your concern is the least, or
surely the least important. It is the Honor of your Family which is concerned
in this Alliance; you are only the Instrument. Do you conceive, Mistress, that
in an Intermarriage between Kingdoms, as when a Daughter of France is married
into Spain, that the Princess herself is alone considered in the Match? No, it
is a match between two Kingdoms, rather than between two Persons. The same
happens in great Families, such as ours. The Alliance between the Families is
the Principal Matter. You ought to have a greater Regard for the Honor of your
Family, than for your own Person; and if the Example of a Princess cannot
inspire you with these noble Thoughts, you cannot surely complain at being used
no worse than all Princesses are used.

'I hope, Madam,' cries Sophia, with a little Elevation of Voice, 'I shall
never do any Thing to dishonor my Family; but as for Mr. Blifil, whatever may
be the Consequence, I am resolved against him, and no Force shall prevail in
his Favor.

Western, who had been within hearing during the greater Part of the preceding
Dialogue, had now exhausted all his Patience; he therefore entered the Room in
a violent Passion, crying, 'D -- n me then if shatunt have un, d -- n me if
shatunt, that is all -- that is all -- D -- n me if shatunt.

Mrs. Western had collected a sufficient Quantity of Wrath for the Use of
Sophia; but she now transfered it all to the Squire. 'Brother,' said she, 'it
is astonishing that you will interfere in a Matter which you had totally left
to my Negotiation. Regard to my Family has made me take upon myself to be the
mediating Power, in order to rectify those mistakes in Policy which you have
committed in your Daughter's Education. For, Brother, it is you; it is your
preposterous Conduct which has eradicated all the Seeds that I had formerly
sown in her tender Mind. -- It is yourself who have taught her Disobedience.'
-- 'Blood!' cries the Squire, foaming at the Mouth, 'you are enough to conquer
the Patience of the Devil! Have I ever taught my Daughter Disobedience? -- Here
she stands; Speak honestly, Girl, did ever I bid you be disobedient to me? Have
I not done every thing to humor and to gratify you, and to make you obedient
to me? And very obedient to me she was when a little Child, before you took her
in Hand and spoiled her, by filling her Head with a Pack of Court Notions. --
Why -- why -- why -- did not I over-hear you telling her she must behave like a
Princess? You have made a Whig of the Girl; and how should her Father, or any
body else, expect any Obedience from her?' 'Brother,' answered Mrs. Western,
with an Air of great disdain, 'I cannot express the Contempt I have for your
Politics of all Kinds; but I will appeal likewise to the young Lady herself,
whether I have ever taught her any Principles of Disobedience. On the contrary,
Niece, have I not endeavored to inspire you with a true Idea of the several
Relations in which a human Creature stands in Society? Have I not taken
infinite Pains to show you, that the Law of Nature has enjoined a Duty on
Children to their Parents? Have I not told you what Plato says on that Subject?
-- A Subject on which you was so notoriously ignorant when you came first under
my Care, that I verily believe you did not know the Relation between a Daughter
and a Father.' ' It Is Lie,' answered Western. 'The Girl is no such Fool, as to
live to eleven Years old without knowing that she was her Father's Relation.'
'O more than Gothic Ignorance,' answered the Lady. -- 'And as for your Manners,
Brother, I must tell you, they deserve a Cane.' 'Why then you may gi' it me, if
you think you are able,' cries the Squire; 'nay, I suppose your Niece there
will be ready enough to help you.' 'Brother,' said Mrs. Western, 'tho' I
despise you beyond Expression, yet I shall endure your Insolence no longer; so
I desire my Coach may be got ready immediately, for I am resolved to leave your
House this very Morning.' 'And a good Riddance too,' answered he; 'I can bear
your Insolence no longer, an you come to that. Blood! it is almost enough of
itself, to make my Daughter undervalue my Sense, when she hears you telling me
every Minute you despise me.' 'It is impossible, it is impossible,' cries the
Aunt, 'no one can undervalue such a Boor. Boar,' answered the Squire, 'I am no
Boar; no, nor Ass; no, nor Rat neither, Madam. Remember that -- I am no Rat. I
am a ture Englishman, and not of your Hanover Breed, that have eat up the
Nation. Thou art one of those wise Men,' cries she, 'whose nonsensical
Principles have undone the Nation; by weakening the Hands of our Government at
home, and by discouraging our Friends, and encouraging our Enemies abroad.'
'Ho! are you come back to your Politics,' cries the Squire, 'as for those I
despise them as much as I do a F -- t. Which last Words he accompanied and
graced with the very Action, which of all others was the most proper to it. And
whether it was this Word, or the Contempt expressed for her Politics, which most
affected Mrs. Western, I will not determine; but she flew into the most violent
Rage, uttered Phrases improper to be here related, and instantly burst out of
the House. Nor did her Brother or her Niece think proper either to stop or to
follow her: For the one was so much possessed by Concern, and the other by
Anger, that they were rendered almost motionless.

The Squire, however, sent after his Sister the same Holla which attends the
Departure of a Hare, when she is first started before the Hounds. He was indeed
a great Master of this Kind of Vociferation, and had a Holla proper for most
Occasions in Life.

Women who, like Mrs. Western, know the World, and have applied themselves to
Philosophy and Politics, would have immediately availed themselves of the
present Disposition of Mr. Western's Mind; by throwing in a few artful
Compliments to his Understanding at the Expense of his absent Adversary; but
poor Sophia was all Simplicity. By which Word we do not intend to insinuate to
the Reader, that she was silly, which is generally understood as a synonimous
Term with simple: For she was indeed a most sensible Girl, and her
Understanding was of the first Rate; but she wanted all that useful Art which
Females convert to so many good Purposes in Life, and which, as it rather
arises from the Heart, than from the Head, is often the Property of the
silliest of Women.

CHAP. IV. A Picture of a Country Gentlewoman taken from the Life.
MR. Western having finished his Holla, and taken a little Breath, began to
lament, in very pathetic Terms, the unfortunate Condition of Men, who are, says
he, always whipped in by the Humors of some d -- nd B -- or other. I think I was
hard run enough by your Mother for one Man; but after giving her a Dodge,
here is another B -- follows me upon the Foil; but curse my Jacket if I will be
run down in this Manner by any o'um.

Sophia never had a single Dispute with her Father, till this unlucky Affair of
Blifil, on any Account, except in Defense of her Mother, whom she had loved
most tenderly, though she lost her in the eleventh Year of her Age. The Squire,
to whom that poor Woman had been a faithful upper Servant all the Time of their
Marriage, had returned that Behavior, by making what the World calls a good
Husband. He very seldom swore at her (perhaps not above once a Week) and never
beat her: She had not the least Occasion for Jealousy, and was perfect Mistress
of her Time: for she was never interrupted by her Husband, who was engaged all
the Morning in his Field Exercises, and all the Evening with Bottle-Companions.
She scarce indeed ever saw him but at Meals; where she had the Pleasure of
carving those Dishes which she had before attended at the Dressing. From these
Meals she retired about five Minutes after the other Servants, having only
stayed to drink the King over the Water. Such were, it seems, Mr. Western's
Orders: For it was a Maxim with him, that Women should come in with the first
Dish, and go out after the first Glass. Obedience to these Orders was perhaps
no difficult Task: For the Conversation (if it may be called so) was seldom
such as could entertain a Lady. It consisted chiefly of Hollowing, Singing,
Relations of sporting Adventures, B -- d -- y, and Abuse of Women and of the
Government.

These, however, were the only Seasons when Mr. Western saw his Wife: For when
he repaired to her Bed, he was generally so drunk that he could not see; and in
the sporting Season he always rose from her before it was light. Thus was she
perfect Mistress of her Time; and had besides a Coach and four usually at her
Command; though unhappily indeed the Badness of the Neighborhood, and of the
Roads, made this of little Use: For none who had set much Value on their Necks
would have passed through the one, or who had set any Value on their Hours,
would have visited the other. Now to deal honestly with the Reader, she did not
make all the Return expected to so much Indulgence: For she had been married
against her Will, by a fond Father, the Match having been rather advantageous
on her Side: For the Squire's Estate was upwards of 3000 l. a Year, and her
Fortune no more than a bare 8000 l. Hence perhaps she had contracted a little
Gloominess of Temper: For she was rather a good Servant than a good Wife; nor
had she always the Gratitude to return the extraordinary Degree of roaring
Mirth, with which the Squire received her, even with a good humoured Smile. She
would, moreover, sometimes interfere with Matters which did not concern her, as
the violent Drinking of her Husband, which in the gentlest Terms she would take
some of the few Opportunities he gave her of remonstrating against. And once in
her Life she very earnestly entreated him to carry her for two Months to
London, which he peremptorily denied; nay, was angry with his Wife for the
Request ever after, being well assured, that all the Husbands in London are
Cuckolds.

For this last, and many other good Reasons, Western at length heartily hated
his Wife; and this Hatred as he never concealed before her Death, so he never
forgot it afterward; but when any Thing in the least soured him, as a bad
scenting Day, or a Distemper among his Hounds, or any other such Misfortune, he
constantly vented his Spleen by Invectives against the Deceased; saying, -- 'If
my Wife was alive now, she would be glad of this.'

These Invectives he was especially desirous of throwing forth before Sophia:
For as he loved her more than he did any other, so he was really jealous that
she had loved her Mother better than him. And this Jealousy Sophia seldom
failed of heightening on these Occasions: For he was not contented with
violating her Ears with the Abuse of her Mother; but endeavored to force an
explicit Approbation of all this Abuse, with which Desire he never could
prevail upon her by any Promise or Threats to comply.

Hence some of my Readers will, perhaps, wonder that the Squire had not hated
Sophia as much as he had hated her Mother; but I must inform them, that Hatred
is not the Effect of Love, even through the Medium of Jealousy. It is, indeed,
very possible for jealous Persons to kill the Objects of their Jealousy, but
not to hate them. Which Sentiment being a pretty hard Morsel, and bearing
something of the Air of a Paradox, we shall leave the Reader to chew the Cud
upon it to the End of the Chapter.

CHAP. V. The generous Behavior of Sophia toward her Aunt.
SOPHIA kept Silence during the foregoing Speech of her Father, nor did she
once answer otherwise than with a Sigh; but as he understood none of the
Language, or as he called it, Lingo of the Eyes, so he was not satisfied
without some further Approbation of his Sentiments; which he now demanded in
the usual Way of his Daughter; telling her, 'he expected she was ready to take
the Part of every Body against him, as she had always done that of the B -- her
Mother.' Sophia remaining still silent, he cried out, 'What art dumb? why do
unt speak. Was not thy Mother a d -- d B -- to me? Answer me that. What, I
suppose, you despise your Father too, and don't think him good enough to speak
to?'

'For Heaven's Sake, Sir,' answered Sophia, 'do not give so cruel a Turn to my
Silence. I am sure I would sooner die than be guilty of any Disrespect toward
you; but how can I venture to speak, when every Word must either offend my dear
Papa, or convict me of the blackest Ingratitude as well as Impiety to the
Memory of the best of Mothers: For such, I am certain my Mamma was always to
me?'

'And your Aunt, I suppose, is the best of Sisters too!' replied the Squire.
'Will you be so kind as to allow that she is a B --? I may fairly insist upon
that, I think.'

'Indeed, Sir,' says Sophia, 'I have great Obligations to my Aunt. She has
been a second Mother to me.'

'And a second Wife to me too,' returned Western; 'so you will take her Part
too! You will not confess that she has acted the Part of the vilest Sister in the
World?'

'Upon my Word, Sir,' cries Sophia, 'I must belie my Heart wickedly if I did. I
know my Aunt and you differ very much in your Ways of thinking; but I have
heard her a thousand Times express the greatest Affection for you; and I am
convinced so far from her being the worst Sister in the World, there are very
few who love a Brother better.'

'The English of all which is,' answered the Squire, 'that I am in the wrong.
Ay, certainly. Ay, to be sure the Woman is in the Right, and the Man in the
Wrong always.'

'Pardon me, Sir,' cries Sophia, 'I do not say so.'

'What don't you say,' answered the Father? 'you have the Impudence to say
she is in the Right; does it not follow then of Course that I Am in the wrong?
And perhaps I am in the wrong to suffer such a Presbyterian Hanoverian B -- to
come into my House. She may 'dite me of a Plot for any Thing I know, and give
my Estate to the Government.'

'So far, Sir, from injuring you or your Estate,' says Sophia, 'if my Aunt had
died Yesterday, I am convinced she would have left you her whole Fortune.'

Whether Sophia intended it or no, I shall not presume to assert; but certain
it is, these last Words penetrated very deep into the Ears of her Father, and
produced a much more sensible Effect than all she had said before. He received
the Sound with much the same Action as a Man receives a Bullet in his Head. He
started, staggered and turned pale. After which he remained silent above a
Minute, and then began in the following hesitating Manner. 'Yesterday! she
would have left me her Esteate Yesterday! would she? Why Yesterday of all the
Days in the Year? I suppose if she dies Tomorrow she will leave it to somebody
else, and perhaps out of the Vamily:' 'My Aunt, Sir,' cries Sophia, 'hath very
violent Passions, and I cannot answer what she may do under their Influence.'

'You cannot! returned the Father, 'and pray who has been the Occasion of
putting her into those violent Passions? Nay, who has actually put her into
them? Was not you and she hard at it before I came into the Room? Besides, was
not all our Quarrel about you? I have not quarreled with Sister these many
Years but upon your Account; and now you would throw the whole Blame upon me,
as thof I should be the Occasion of her leaving her Esteate out of the Vamily.
I could have expected no better indeed, this is like the Return you make to all
the rest of my Fondness.'

'I beseech you then,' cries Sophia, 'upon my Knees I beseech you, if I have
been the unhappy Occasion of this Difference, that you will endeavor to make
it up with my Aunt, and not suffer her to leave your House in this violent Rage
of Anger: She is a very good-natured Woman, and a few civil Words will satisfy
her -- Let me entreat you, Sir.'

'So I must go and ask Pardon for your Fault, must I?' answered Western. 'You
have lost the Hare, and I must draw every Way to find her again? Indeed if I
was certain' -- Here he stopped, and Sophia throwing in more Entreaties, at
length prevailed upon him; and after venting two or three bitter sarcastical
Expressions against his Daughter, he departed as fast as he could to recover
his Sister, before her Equipage could be gotten ready.

Sophia then retired to her Chamber of Mourning, where she indulged herself (if
the Phrase may be allowed me) in all the Luxury of tender Grief. She read over
the Letter which she had received from Jones more than once; her Muff too was
used on this Occasion; and she bathed both these, as well as herself, with her
Tears. In this Situation, the friendly Mrs. Honor exerted her utmost Abilities
to comfort her afflicted Mistress. She ran over the Names of many young
Gentlemen; and having greatly commended their Parts and Persons, assured Sophia
that she might take her choice of any. These Methods must have certainly been
used with some Success in Disorders of the like Kind, or so skilful a
Practitioner as Mrs. Honor would never have ventured to apply them; nay, I
have heard that the College of Chambermaids hold them to be as sovereign
Remedies as any in the female Dispensary; but whether it was that Sophia's
Disease differed inwardly, from those Cases with which it agreed in external
Symptoms, I will not assert; but, in Fact, the good Waiting Woman did more Harm
than Good, and at last so incensed her Mistress (which was no easy Matter) that
with an angry Voice she dismissed her from her Presence.

CHAP. VI. Containing great Variety of Matter.
THE Squire overtook his Sister just as she was stepping into the Coach, and
partly by Force, and partly by Solicitations, prevailed upon her to order her
Horses back into their Quarters. He succeeded in this Attempt without much
Difficulty: For the Lady was, as we have already hinted, of a most placable
Disposition, and greatly loved her Brother, though she despised his Parts, or
rather his little Knowledge of the World.

Poor Sophia, who had first set on Foot this Reconciliation, was now made the
Sacrifice to it. They both concurred in their Censures on her Conduct; jointly
declared War against her; and directly proceeded to Council, how to carry it on
in the most vigorous Manner. For this Purpose, Mrs. Western proposed not only
an immediate Conclusion of the Treaty with Allworthy; but as immediately to
carry it into Execution; saying, 'That there was no other Way to succeed with
her Niece but by violent Methods, which she was convinced Sophia had not
sufficient Resolution to resist. 'By violent, says she, 'I mean rather, hasty
Measures: For as to Confinement or absolute Force, no such Things must or can
be attempted. Our Plan must be concerted for a Surprise, and not for a Storm.'

These Matters were resolved on, when Mr. Blifil came to pay a Visit to his
Mistress. The Squire no sooner heard of his Arrival, than he stepped aside, by
his Sister's Advice, to give his Daughter Orders for the proper Reception of
her Lover; which he did with the most bitter Execrations and Denunciations of
of Judgment on her Refusal.

The Impetuosity of the Squire bore down all before him; and Sophia, as her
Aunt very wisely foresaw, was not able to resist him. She agreed, therefore, to
see Blifil, though she had scarce Spirits or Strength sufficient to utter her
Assent. Indeed to give a peremtory Denial to a Father whom she so tenderly
loved, was no easy Task. Had this Circumstance been out of the Case, much less
Resolution than what she was really Mistress of, would, perhaps, have served
her; but it is no unusual Thing to ascribe those Actions entirely to Fear,
which are in a great Measure produced by Love.

In Pursuance, therefore, of her Father's peremptory Command, Sophia now
admitted Mr. Blifil's Visit. Scenes, like this, when painted at large, afford,
as we have observed, very little Entertainment to the Reader. Here, therefore,
we shall strictly adhere to a Rule of Horace; by which Writers are directed to
pass over all those Matters, which they despair of placing in a shining Light.
A Rule, we conceive, of excellent Use as well to the Historian as to the Poet;
and which, if followed, must, at least, have this good Effect, that many a
great Evil (for so all great Books are called) would thus be reduced to a small
one.

It is possible the great Art used by Blifil at this Interview, would have
prevailed on Sophia to have made another Man in his Circumstances her
Confident, and to have revealed the whole Secret of her Heart to him; but she
had contracted so ill an Opinion of this young Gentleman, that she was resolved
to place no Confidence in him: For Simplicity, when set on it is Guard, is often
a Match for Cunning. Her Behavior to him, therefore, was entirely forced, and
indeed such as is generally prescribed to Virgins upon the second formal Visit
from one who is appointed for their Husband.

But though Blifil declared himself perfectly satisfied with his Reception to the
Squire, yet that Gentleman, who in Company with his Sister had overheard all,
was not so well pleased. He resolved, in Pursuance of the Advice of the sage
Lady, to push Matters as forward as possible; and addressing himself to his
intended Son-in-Law in the hunting Phrase, he cried after a loud Holla, 'Follow
her, Boy, follow her; run in, run in, that is it, Honeys. Dead, dead, dead. --
Never be bashful, nor stand shall I, shall I? -- Allworthy and I can finish all
Matters between us this Afternoon, and let us have the Wedding Tomorrow.

Blifil having conveyed the utmost Satisfaction into his Countenance, answered;
'As there is nothing, Sir, in this World, which I so eagerly desire as an
Alliance with your Family, except my Union with the most amiable and deserving
Sophia, you may easily imagine how impatient I must be to see myself in
Possession of my two highest Wishes. If I have not therefore importuned you on
this Head, you will impute it only to my Fear of offending the Lady, by
endeavoring to hurry on so blessed an Event, faster than a strict Compliance
with all the Rules of Decency and Decorum will permit. But if by your Interest,
Sir, she might be induced to dispense with any Formalities.' --

'Formalities! with a Pox!' answered the Squire, 'Pooh, all Stuff and Nonsense.
I tell thee, she shall have thee Tomorrow; you will know the World better
hereafter, when you come to my Age. Women never gi' their Consent, Man, if they
can help it, it is not the Fashion. If I had staid for her Momother's Consent, I
might have been a Bachelor to this Day. -- To her, to her, to her, that is it,
you jolly Dog. I tell thee shat have her Tomorrow Morning.'

Blifil suffered himself to be overpowered by the forcible Rhetoric of the
Squire; and it being agreed that Western should close with Allworthy that very
Afternoon, the Lover departed home, having first earnestly begged that no
Violence might be offered to the Lady by this Haste, in the same Manner as a
Popish Inquisitor begs the Lay Power to do no Violence to the Heretic,
delivered over to it, and against whom the Church has passed Sentence.

And to say the Truth, Blifil had passed Sentence against Sophia; for however
pleased he had declared himself to Western, with his Reception, he was by no
means satisfied, unless it was that he was satisfied of the Hatred and Scorn of
his Mistress; and this had produced no less reciprocal Hatred and Scorn in him.
It may, perhaps, be asked, Why then did he not put an immediate End to all
further Courtship? I answer, for that very Reason, as well as for several
others equally good, which we shall now proceed to open to the Reader.

Though Mr. Blifil was not of the Complexion of Jones, nor ready to eat every
Woman he saw, yet he was far from being destitute of that Appetite which is
said to be the common Property of Animals. With this, he had the distinguishing
Taste, which serves to direct Men in their Choice of the Objects, or Food of
their several Appetites; and this taught him to consider Sophia as a most
delicious Morsel, indeed to regard her with the same Desires which an Ortolan
inspires into the Soul on Epicure. Now the Agonies which affected the Mind of
Sophia rather augmented than impaired her Beauty; for her Tears added
Brightness to her Eyes, and her Breasts rose higher with her Sighs. Indeed no
one has seen Beauty in its highest Luster, who has never seen it in Distress.
Blifil therefore looked on this human Ortolan with greater Desire than when he
had viewed her last; nor was his Desire at all lessened by the Aversion which
he discovered in her to himself. On the contrary, this served rather to
heighten the Pleasure he proposed in rifling her Charms, as it added Triumph to
Lust; nay, he had some further Views, from obtaining the absolute Possession of
her Person, which we detest too much even to mention; and Revenge itself was
not without its Share in the Gratifications which he promised himself. the
rivalling poor Jones, and supplanting him in her Affections, added another Spur
to his Pursuit, and promised another additional Rapture to his Enjoyment.

Besides all these Views, which to some scrupulous Persons may seem to savor
too much of Malevolence, he had one Prospect, which few Readers will regard
with any great Abhorrence. And this was the Estate of Mr. Western; which was
all to be settled on his Daughter and her Issue; for so extravagant was the
Affection of that fond Parent, that provided his Child would but consent to be
miserable with the Husband he chose, he cared not at what Price he purchased
him.

For these Reasons Mr. Blifil was so desirous of the Match, that he intended to
deceive Sophia, by pretending Love to her; and to deceive her Father and his
own Uncle, by pretending he was beloved by her. In doing this, he availed
himself of the Piety of Thwackum, who held, that if the End proposed was
religious (as surely Matrimony is) it mattered not how wicked were the Means.
As, to other Occasions he used to apply the Philosophy of Square, which taught,
that the End was immaterial, so that the Means were fair and consistent with
moral Rectitude. To say Truth, there were few Occurrences in Life on which he
could not draw Advantantage from the Precepts of one or other of those great
Masters.

Little Deceit was indeed necessary to be practiced on Mr. Western; who thought
the Inclinations of his Daughter of as little Consequence, as Blifil himself
conceived them to be; but as the Sentiments of Mr. Allworthy were of a very
different Kind, so it was absolutely necessary to impose on him. In this,
however, Blifil was so well assisted by Western, that he succeeded without
Difficulty: For as Mr. Allworthy had been assured by her Father that Sophia had
a proper Affection for Blifil, and that all which he had suspected concerning
Jones, was entirely false, Blifil had nothing more to do, than to confirm these
Assertions; which he did with such Equivocations, that he preserved a Salvo for
his Conscience; and had the Satisfaction of conveying a Lie to his Uncle,
without the Guilt of telling one. When he was examined touching the
Inclinations of Sophia, by Allworthy, who said, 'he would, on no Account, be
accessory to the forcing a young Lady into a Marriage contrary to her own
Will,' he answered, 'That the real Sentiments of young Ladies were very
difficult to be understood; that her Behavior to him was full as forward as he
wished it, and that if he could believe her Father, she had all the Affection
for him which any Lover could desire. As for Jones,' said he, 'whom I am loath
to call Villain, though his Behavior to you, Sir, sufficiently justifies the
Appellation, his own Vanity, or perhaps some wicked Views, might make him boast
of a Falsehood; for if there had been any Reality in Miss Western's Love to him,
the Greatness of her Fortune would never have suffered him to desert her, as
you are well informed he has. Lastly, Sir, I promise you I would not myself,
for any Consideration, no not for the whole World, consent to marry this young
Lady, if I was not persuaded she had all the Passion for me which I desire she
should have.

This excellent Method of conveying a Falsehood with the Heart only, without
making the Tongue guilty of an Untruth, by the Means of Equivocation and
Imposture, has quieted the Conscience of many a notable Deceiver; and yet when
we consider that it is Omniscience on which these endeavor to impose, it may
possibly seem capable only of affording a very superficial Comfort; and that
this artful and refined Distinction between communicating a Lie, and telling
one, is hardly worth the Pains it costs them.

Allworthy was pretty well satisfied with what Mr. Western and Mr. Blifil told
him; and the Treaty was now at the End of two Days, concluded. Nothing then
remained previous to the Office of the Priest, but the Office of the Lawyers,
which threatened to take up so much Time, that Western offered to bind himself
by all Manner of Covenants, rather than to defer the Happiness of the young
Couple. Indeed he was so very earnest and pressing, that an indifferent Person
might have concluded he was more a Principal in this Match than he really was:
But this Eagerness was natural to him on all Occasions; and he conducted every
Scheme he undertook in such a Manner, as if the Success of that alone was
sufficient to constitute the whole Happiness of his Life.

The joint Importunities of both Father and Son-in-law would probably have
prevailed on Mr. Allworthy, who brooked but ill any Delay of giving Happiness
to others, had not Sophia herself prevented it, and taken Measures to put a
final End to the whole Treaty, and to rob both Church and Law of those Taxes
which these wise Bodies have thought proper to receive from the Propagation of
the human Species, in a lawful Manner. Of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. A strange Resolution of Sophia, and a more strange Stratagem of
Mrs. Honor.
THOUGH Mrs. Honor was principally attached to her Interest, she was not without
some little Attachment to Sophia. To say Truth, it was very difficult for any
one to know that young Lady without loving her. She no sooner, therefore, heard
a Piece of News, which she imagined to be of great Importance to her Mistress,
than quite forgetting the Anger which she had conceived two Days before, at her
unpleasant Dismission from Sophia's Presence, she ran hastily to inform her of
this News.

The Beginning of her Discourse was as abrupt as her Entrance into the Room. 'O
dear Ma'am,' says she, 'what does your La'ship think? To be sure, I am
frightened out of my Wits; and yet I thought it my Duty to tell your La'ship,
though perhaps it may make you angry, for we Servants don't always know what will
make our Ladies angry; for to be sure, every thing is always laid to the Charge
of a Servant. When our Ladies are out of Humor, to be sure we must be scolded,
and to be sure I should not wonder if your La'ship should be out of Humor;
nay, it must surprise you certainly, ay, and shock you too.' -- 'Good Honor!
let me know it without any longer Preface,' says Sophia; 'there are few Things,
I promise you, which will surprise, and fewer which will shock me.' Dear Ma'am,
answered ed Honor, 'to be sure, I overheard my Master talking to Parson Supple
about getting a License this very Afternoon; and to be sure I heard him say
your La'ship should be married To-marrow Morning.' Sophia turned pale at these
Words, and repeated eagerly, 'Tomorrow Morning -- Yes, Madam,' replied the
trusty Waiting Woman, 'I will take my Oath. I heard my Master say so.' Honor,'
says Sophia, 'you have both surprised and shocked me to such a Degree, that I
have scarce any Breath or Spirit left. What is to be done in my dreadful
Situation?' I wish I was able to advise your La'ship,' says she. 'Do, advise
me,' cries Sophia, 'pray dear Honor advise me. Think what you would attempt if
it was your own Case. Indeed, Ma'am,' cries Honor, 'I wish your La'ship and I
could change Situations; that is, I mean, without hurting your La'ship, for to
be sure, I don't wish you so bad as to be a Servant; but because that if so be
it was my Case, I should find no Manner of Difficulty in it; for in my poor
Opinion, young Squire Blifil is a charming, sweet, handsome Man.' -- 'Don't
mention such Stuff,' cries Sophia.' -- Such Stuff,' repeated Honor, 'why there
-- Well, to be sure, what is one Man's Meat is another Man's Poison, and the
same is altogether as true of Women.' Honor,' says Sophia, 'rather than Submit
to be the Wife of that contemptible Wretch, I would plunge a Dagger into my
Heart.' 'O lud, Ma'am,' answered the other, 'I am sure you frighten me out of
my Wits now. Let me beseech your La'ship not to suffer such wicked Thoughts to
come into your Head. O lud to be sure I tremble every Inch of me. Dear Ma'am
consider -- that to be denied Christian Burial, and to have your Corpse buried
in the Highway, and a Stake drove through you, as Farmer Halfpenny was served
at Ox-Cross, and, to be sure, his Ghost has walked there ever since; for
several People have seen him. To be sure it can be nothing but the Devil which
can put such wicked Thoughts into the Head of any body; for certainly it is
less wicked to hurt all the World than one's own dear Self, and so I have heard
said by more Parsons than one. If your La'ship has such a violent Aversion,
and hates the young Gentleman so very bad, that you cannot bear to think of
going into Bed to him; for to be sure there may be such Antipathies in Nature,
and one had lieverer touch a Toad than the Flesh of some People. --

Sophia had been too much wraped in Contemplation to pay any great Attention to
the foregoing excellent Discourse of her Maid; interrupting her therefore,
without making any answer to it, she said, ' Honor, I am come to a Resolution.
I am determined to leave my Father's House this very Night; and if you have the
Friendship for me which you have often professed, you will keep me Company.'
'That I will, Ma'am, to the World's End,' answered Honor; 'but I beg your
La'ship to consider the Consequence before you undertake any rash Action. Where
can your La'ship possibly go?' 'There is,' replied Sophia, 'a Lady of Quality
in London, a Relation of mine, who spent several Months with my Aunt in the
Country; during all which Time she treated me with great Kindness, and
expressed so much Pleasure in my Company, that she earnestly desired my Aunt to
suffer me to go with her to London. As she is a Woman of very great Note, I
shall easily find her out, and I make no Doubt of being very well and kindly
received by her.' 'I would not have your La'ship too confident of that,' cries
Honor; 'for the first Lady I lived with used to invite People very earnestly
to her House; but if she heard afterward they were coming, she used to get out
of the Way. Besides, though this Lady would be very glad to see your La'ship, as
to be sure any body would be glad to see your La'ship, yet when she hears your
La'ship is run away from my Master' -- 'You are mistaken, Honour' says Sophia,
'she looks upon the Authority of a Father in a much lower Light than I do; for
she pressed me violently to go to London with her, and when I refused to go
without my Father's Consent, she laughed me to Scorn, called me silly Country
Girl, and said I should make a pure loving Wife, since I could be so dutiful a
Daughter. So I have no Doubt but she will both receive me, and protect me too,
till my Father, finding me out of his Power, can be brought to some Reason.'

'Well but, Ma'am,' answered Honor, 'how does your La'ship think of making
your Escape? Where will you get any Horses or Conveyance? for as for your own
Horse, as all the Servants know a little how Matters stand between my Master
and your La'ship, Robin will be hanged before he will suffer it to go out of
the Stable without my Master's express Orders.' 'I intend to escape,' said
Sophia, by walking out of the Doors when they are open. I thank Heaven my Legs
are very able to carry me. They have supported me many a long Evening, after a
Fiddle, with no very agreeable Partner; and surely they will assist me in
running from so detestable a Partner for Life,' 'O Heavens, Ma'am, does your
La'ship know what you are saying?' cries Honor, 'would you think of walking
about the Country by Night and alone?' 'Not alone,' answered the Lady, 'you
have promised to bear me Company.' 'Yes, to be sure,' cries Honor, 'I will
follow your La'ship through the World; but your La'ship had almost as good be
alone; for I shall not be able to defend you, if any Robbers, or other
Villians, should meet with you. Nay, I should be in as horrible a Fright as
your La'ship; for to be certain, they would ravish us both. Besides, Ma'am,
consider how cold the Nights are now, we shall be frozen to Death.' 'A good
brisk Pace,' answered Sophia, 'will preserve us from the Cold; and if you
cannot defend me from a Villain, Honor, I will defend you; for I will take a
Pistol with me. There are two always charged in the Hall.' 'Dear Ma'am, you
frighten me more and more,' cries Honor, 'sure your La'ship would not venture
to fire it off! I had rather run any Chance, than your La'ship should do that.'
'Why so?' says Sophia, 'smiling; would not you, Honor, fire a Pistol at any
one who should attack your Virtue?' To be sure, Ma'am,' cries Honor, 'one's
Virtue is a dear Thing, especially to us poor Servants; for it is our
Livelihoood, as a Body may say, yet I mortally hate Firearms; for so many
Accidents happen by them.' 'Well, well,' says Sophia, 'I believe I may ensure
your Virtue at a very cheap Rate, without carrying any Arms with us; for I
intend to take Horses at the very first Town we come to, and we shall hardly be
attacked in our Way thither. Look'ee, Honor, I am resolved to go, and if you
will attend me, I promise you I will reward you to the very utmost of my
Power.'

This last Argument had a stronger Effect on Honor than all the preceding. And
since she saw her Mistress so determined, she desisted from any further
Dissuasions. They then entered into a Debate on Ways and Means of executing
their Project. Here a very stubborn Difficulty occurred, and this was the
Removal of their Effects, which was much more easily got over by the Mistress
than by the Maid: For when a Lady has once taken a Resolution to run to a
Lover, or to run from him, all Obstacles are considered as Trifles. But Honor
was inspired by no such Motive: she had no Raptures to expect, nor any Terrors
to shun, and besides the real Value of her Clothes, i^ which consisted great
Part of her Fortune, she had a capricious Fondness for several Gowns, and other
Things; either because they became her, or because they were given her by such
a particular Person; because she had brought them lately, or because she had
had them long; or for some other Reasons equally good; so that she could not
endure the Thought of leaving the poor Things behind her exposed to the Mercy
of Western, who, she doubted not, would make them suffer Martyrdom in his Rage.

The ingenious Mrs. Honor having applied all her Oratory to dissuade her
Mistress from her Purpose, when the found her positively determined, at last
started the following Expedient to remove her Clothes, viz. to get herself
turned out of Doors that very Evening. Sophia highly approved this Method, but
doubted how it might be brought about. 'Oh! Ma'am,' cries Honor, 'your La'ship
may trust that to me; we Servants very well know how to obtain this Favor of
our Masters and Mistresses; though sometimes indeed where they owe us more Wages
than they can readily pay, they will put up with all our Affronts, and will
hardly take any Warning we can give them; but the Squire is none of those; and
since your La'ship is resolved upon setting out to Night, I warrant I get
discharged this Afternoon.' It was then resolved that she should pack up some
Linen, and a Nightgown for Sophia, with her own Things; and as for all her
other Clothes, the young Lady abandoned them with no more Remorse than the
Sailor feels when he throws over the Goods of others in order to save his own
Life.

CHAP. VIII. Containing Scenes of Altercation, of no very uncommon Kind.
MRS. Honor had scarce sooner parted from her young Lady, than something (for
I would not, like the old Woman in Quivedo, injure the Devil by any false
Accusation, and possibly he might have no Hand in it) but something, I say,
suggested to her, that by sacrificing Sophia and all her Secrets to Mr.
Western, she might probably make her Fortune. Many Considerations urged this
Discovery. The fair Prospect of a handsome Reward for so great and acceptable a
Service to the Squire, tempted her Avarice; and again, the Danger of the
Enterprise she had undertaken; the Incertainty of its Success; Night, Cold,
Robbers, Ravishers, all alarmed her Fears. So forcibly did all these operate
upon her, that she was almost determined to go directly to the Squire, and to
lay open the whole Affair. She was, however, too upright a Judge to decree on
one Side before she had heard the other. And here, first, a Journey to London
appeared very strongly in Support of Sophia. She eagerly longed to see a Place
in which she fancied Charms short only of those which a raptured Saint imagines
in Heaven. In the next Place, as she knew Sophia to have much more Generosity
than her Master, so her Fidelity promised her a greater Reward than she could
gain by Treachery. She then crossexamined all the Articles which had raised her
Fears on the other Side, and found, on fairly sifting the Matter, that there
was very little in them. And now both Scales being reduced to a pretty even
Balance, her Love to her Mistress being thrown into the Scale of her
Integrity, made that rather preponderate, when a Circumstance struck upon her
Imagination, which might have had a dangerous Effect, had its whole Weight been
fairly put into the other Scale. This was the Length of Time which must
intervene before Sophia would be able to fulfill her Promise; for though she was
entitled to her Mother's Fortune, at the Death of her Father, and to the Sum of
3000l. left her by an Uncle when she came of Age; yet these were distant Days,
and many Accidents might prevent the intended Generosity of the young Lady,
whereas the Rewards she might expect from Mr. Western were immediate. But while
she was pursuing this Thought, the good Genius of Sophia, or that which
presided over the Integrity of Mrs. Honor, or perhaps mere Chance, sent an
Accident in her Way, which at once preserved her Fidelity, and even facilitated
their intended Business.

Mrs. Western's Maid claimed great Superiority over Mrs. Honor, on several
Accounts. First, her Birth was higher: For her great Grandmother by the
Mother's Side was a Cousin, not far removed, to an Irish Peer. Secondly, her
Wages were greater. And lastly, she had been at London, and had of Consequence
seen more of the World. She had always behaved, therefore, to Mrs. Honor with
that Reserve, and had always exacted of her those Marks of Distinction, which
every Order of Females preserve and require in Conversation with those of an
inferior Order. Now as Honor did not at all Times agree with this Doctrine;
but would frequently break in upon the Respect which the other demanded, Mrs
Western's Maid was not at all pleased with her Company: Indeed, she earnestly
longed to return home to the House of her Mistress, where she domineered at
Will over all the other Servants. She had been greatly, therefore, disappointed
in the Morning when Mrs. Western had changed her Mind on the very Point of
Departure, and had been in what is vulgarly called, a glouting Humor ever
since.

In this Humor, which was none of the sweetest, she came into the Room where
Honor was debating with herself, in the Manner we have above related. Honor
no sooner saw her, than she addressed her in the following obliging Phrase.
'Soh! Madam, I find we are to have the Pleasure of your Company longer, which I
was afraid the Quarrel between my Master and your Lady would have robbed us
of.' 'I don't know, Madam,' answered the other, 'who you mean by We and Us. I
assure you I do not look on any of the Servants in this House to be proper
Company for me. I am Company, I hope, for their Betters every Day in the Week.
I do not speak on your Account, Mrs. Honor; for you are a civilized young
Woman; and when you have seen a little more of the World, I should not be
ashamed to walk with you in St. James's Park.' 'Hoity! toity!' cries Honor,
Madam is in her Airs, I protest. Mrs. Honor forsooth! sure, Madam, you might
call me by my Surname; for though my Lady calls me Honor, I have a Surname as
well as other Folks. Ashamed to walk with me, quotha! Marry, as good as
yourself I hope.' 'Since you make such a Return to my Civility,' said the
other, I must acquaint you, Mrs. Honor, that you are not so good as me. In the
Country one is indeed obliged to take up with all kind of Trumpery, but in Town
I visit none but the Women of Women of Quality. Indeed, Mrs. Honor, there is
some Difference, I hope, between you and me.' 'I hope so too,' answered Honor,
'there is some Difference in our Ages, and -- I think in our Persons.' Upon
speaking which last Words, she strutted by Mrs. Western's Maid with the most
provoking Air of Contempt; turning up her Nose, tossing her Head, and violently
brushing the Hoop of her Competitor with her own. The other Lady put on one of
her most malicious Sneers, and said, 'Creature! you are below my Anger; and it
is beneath me to give ill Words to such an audacious saucy Trollop; but, Hussy,
I must tell you, your Breeding shows the Meanness of your Birth as well as of
your Education; and both very properly qualify you to be the mean serving Woman
of a Country Girl.' 'Don't abuse my Lady,' cries Honor, 'I will not take that of
you; she is as much better than yours as she is younger, and ten thousand Times
more handsomer.

Here rather ill Luck, or rather good Luck sent Mrs. Western to see her Maid in
Tears, which began to flow plentifully at her Approach; and of which being
asked the Reason by her Mistress, she presently acquainted her, that her Tears
were occasioned by the rude Treatment of that Creature there, meaning Honor.
'And, Madam,' continued she, 'I could have despised all she said to me; but she
had the Audacity to affront your Ladyship, and to call you ugly -- Yes, Madam,
she called you ugly old Cat to my Face. I could not bear to hear your Ladyship
called ugly.' -- Why do you repeat her Impudence so often?' said Mrs. Western.
And then turning to Mrs. Honor, she asked her how she had the Assurance to
mention her Name with Disrespect? Disrespect Madam! answered Honor, I never
mentioned your Name at all. I said somebody was not as handsome as my Mistress,
and to be sure you know that as well as I. Hussy, 'replied the Lady, 'I will
make such a saucy Trollop as yourself, know that I am not a proper Subject of
your Discourse. And if my Brother does not discharge you this Moment, I will
never sleep in his House again. I will find him out and have you discharged
this Moment.' 'Discharged!' cries Honor, 'and suppose I am, there are more
Places in the World than one. Thank Heaven, good Servants need not want Places;
and if you turn away all who do not think you handsome, you will want Servants
very soon, let me tell you that.

Mrs. Western spoke, or rather thundered in Answer; but as she was hardly
articulate, we cannot be very certain of the Identical Words: We shall,
therefore, omit inserting a Speech, which, at best, would not greatly redound
to her Honor. She then departed in search of her Brother, with a Countenance
so full of Rage, that she resembled one of the Furies rather than a human
Creature.

The two Chambermaids being again left alone, began a second Bout at
Altercation, which soon produced a Combat of a more active Kind. In this the
Victory belonged to the Lady of Inferior Rank, but not without some Loss of
Blood, of Hair, and of Lawn and Muslin.

CHAP. IX. The wise Demeanor of Mr. Western in the Character of a Magistrate.
A Hint to Justices of Peace, concerning the necessary Qualifications of a
Clerk; with extraordinary Instances of paternal Madness, and filial Affection.
LOgicians sometimes prove too much by an Argument, and Politicians often
overreach themselves in a Scheme. Thus had it like to have happened to Mrs.
Honor, who instead of recovering the rest of her Clothes, had like to have
stopped even those she had on her Back from escaping: For the Squire no sooner
heard of her having abused his Sister, than he swore twenty Oaths he would send
her to Bridewell.

Mrs. Western was a very good-natured Woman, and ordinarily of a forgiving
Temper. She had lately remitted the Trespass of a Stage-coach Man, who had
overturned her Post-chaise into a Ditch; nay, she had even broken the Law in
refusing to prosecute a High-way-man who had robbed her, not only of a Sum of
Money, but of her Earrings; at the same Time d -- ning her, and saying, 'such
handsome B -- s as you, don't want Jewels to set them off, and be d -- nd to
you. But now, so uncertain are our Tempers, and so much do we at different
Times differ from ourselves, she would hear of no Mitigation; nor could all the
affected Penitence of Honor, nor all the Entreaties of Sophia for her own
Servant, prevail with her to desist from earnestly desiring her Brother to
execute Justiceship (for it was indeed a Syllable more than Justice) on the
Wench.

But luckily the Clerk had a Qualification, which no Clerk to a Justice of
Peace ought ever to be without, namely, some Understanding in the Law of this
Realm. He therefore whispered in the Ear of the Justice, that he would exceed
his Authority by committing the Girl to Bridewell, as there had been no Attempt
to break the Peace; 'for I am afraid, Sir,' says he, 'you cannot legally commit
any one to Bridewell only for Ill-breeding.'

In the Matters of high Importance, particularly in Cases relating to the Game,
the Justice was not always attentive to these Admonitions of his Clerk: For,
indeed, in executing the Laws under that Head, many Justices of Peace suppose
they have a large discretionary Power. By Virtue of which, under the Notion of
searching for, and taking away Engines for the Destruction of the Game, they
often commit Trespasses, and sometimes Felony at their Pleasure.

But this Offense was not of quite so high a Nature, nor so dangerous to the
Society. Here, therefore, the Justice behaved with some Attention to the Advice
of his Clerk: For, in Fact, he had already had two Informations exhibited
against him in the King's Bench, and had no Curiosity to try a third.

The Squire, therefore, putting on a most wise and significant Countenance,
after a Preface of several Hum's and Has, told his Sister, that upon more
mature Deliberation, he was of Opinion that as there was no breaking up of the
Peace, such as the Law, says he, 'calls breaking open a Door, or breaking a
Hedge, or breaking a Head; or any such Sort of Breaking; the Matter did not
amount to a felonious Kind of a Thing, nor Trespasses nor Damages, and,
therefore, there was no Punishment in the Law for it.

Mrs. Western said, 'she knew the Law much better; that she had known Servants
very severely punished for affronting their Masters; and then named a certain
Justice of the Peace in London, who,' she said, 'would commit a Servant to
Bridewell, at any Time when a Master or Mistress desired it.

'Like enough, cries the Squire, 'it may be so in London; but the Law is
different in the Country. -- ' Here followed a very learned Dispute between the
Brother and Sister concerning the Law, which we would insert, if we imagined
many of our Readers could understand it. This was, however, at length referred
by both Parties to the Clerk, who decided it in Favor of the Magistrate; and
Mrs. Western was, in the End, obliged to content herself with the Satisfaction
of having Honor turned away; to which Sophia herself very readily and
cheerfully consented.

Thus Fortune, after having diverted herself, according to Custom, with two or
three Frolicks, at last disposed all Matters to the Advantage of our Heroine;
who, indeed, succeeded admirably well in her Deceit, considering it was the
first she ever had practiced. And, to say the Truth, I have often concluded,
that the honest Part of Mankind would be much too hard for the knavish, if they
could bring themselves to incur the Guilt, or thought it worth their while to
take the Trouble.

Honor acted her Part to the utmost Perfection. She no sooner saw herself
secure from all Danger of Bridewell, a Word which had raised most horrible
Ideas in her Mind, than she resumed those Airs which her Terrors before had a
little abated; and laid down her Place, with as much Affectation of Content,
and indeed of Contempt, as was ever practiced at the Resignation of Places of a
much greater Importance. If the Reader pleases, therefore, we choose rather to
say she resigned -- which has, indeed, been always held a synonymous
Expression with being turned out, or turned away.

Mr. Western ordered her to be very expeditious in packing: For his Sister
declared she would not sleep another Night under the same Roof with so impudent
a Slut. To work therefore she went, and that so earnestly, that every Thing was
ready early in the Evening; when having received her Wages, away packed Bag and
Baggage, to the great Satisfaction of every one, but of none more than of
Sophia; who, having appointed her Maid to meet her at a certain Place not far
from the House, exactly at the dreadful and ghostly Hour of Twelve, began to
prepare for her own Departure.

But first she was obliged to give two painful Audiences, the one to her Aunt,
and the other to her Father. In these Mrs. Western herself began to talk to her
in a more peremptory Style than before; but her Father treated her in so
violent and outrageous a Manner, that he frightened her into an affected
Compliance with his Will, which so highly pleased the good Squire, that he
changed his Frowns into Smiles, and his Menaces into promises; he vowed his
whole Soul was wrapped in hers, that her Consent (for so he construed the Words,
You know, Sir, I must not, nor can refuse to obey any absolute Command of
yours,) had made him the happiest of Mankind. He then gave her a large
Bank-Bill to dispose of in any Trinkets she pleased, and kissed and embraced
her in the fondest Manner, while Tears of Joy trickled from those Eyes, which a
few Moments before had darted Fire and Rage against the dear Object of all his
Affection.

Instances of this Behavior in Parents are so common, that the Reader, I doubt
not, will be very little astonished at the whole Conduct of Mr. Western. If he
should, I own I am not able to account for it; since that he loved his Daughter
most tenderly, is, I think, beyond Dispute. So indeed have many others, who
have rendered their Children most completely miserable by the same Conduct;
which, though it is almost universal in Parents, has always appeared to me to be
the most unaccountable of all the Absurdities, which ever entered into the
Brain of that strange perfidious Creature Man.

The latter Part of Mr. Western's Behavior had so strong an Effect on the
tender Heart of Sophia, that it suggested a Thought to her, which not all the
politic Sophistry of her Aunt, nor all the Menaces of her Father had ever once
brought into her Head. She reverenced her Father so piously, and loved him so
passionately, that she had scarce ever felt more pleasing Sensations, than what
arose from the Share she frequently had of contributing to his Amusement; and
sometimes, perhaps, to higher Gratifications; for he never could contain the
Delight of hearing her commended, which he had the Satisfaction of hearing
almost every Day of her Life. The Idea, therefore, of the immense Happiness she
should convey to her Father by her Consent to this Match, made a strong
Impression on her Mind. Again, the extreme Piety of such an Act of Obedience,
worked very forcibly, as she had a very deep Sense of Religion. Lastly, when
she reflected how much she herself was to suffer, being indeed to become little
less than a Sacrifice, or a Martyr, to filial Love and Duty, she felt an
agreeable Tickling in a certain little Passion, which though it bears no
immediate Affinity either to Religion or Virtue, is often so kind as to lend
great Assistance in executing the Purposes of both.

Sophia was charmed with the Contemplation of so heroic an Action, and began to
compliment herself with much permature Flattery, when Cupid, who lay hid in her
Muff, suddenly crept out, and, like Punchinello in a Puppet-shew, kicked all
out before him. In Truth (for we scorn to deceive our Reader, or to vindicate
the Character of our Heroine, by ascribing her Actions to supernatural Impulse)
the Thoughts of her beloved Jones, and some Hopes (however distant) in which he
was very particularly concerned, immediately destroyed all which filial Love,
Piety and Pride had, with their joint Endeavors, been laboring to bring about.

But before we proceed any farther with Sophia, we must now look back to Mr.
Jones.

CHAP. X. Containing several Matters natural enough perhaps, but Low.
THE Reader will be pleased to remember, that we left Mr. Jones in the
Beginning of this Book, on his Road to Bristol; being determined to seek his
Fortune at Sea, or rather, indeed, to fly away from his Fortune on Shore.

It happened, (a Thing not very unusual) that the Guide who undertook to
conduct him on his Way, was unluckily unacquainted with the Road; so that
having missed his right Track, and being ashamed to ask Information, he rambled
about backwards and forwards, till Night came on, and it began to grow dark.
Jones suspecting what had happened, acquainted the Guide with his
Apprehensions; but he insisted on it, that they were in the right Road, and
added, it would be very strange if he should not know the Road to Bristol;
though, in Reality, it would have been much stranger if he had known it, having
never past through it in his Life before.

Jones had not such implicit Faith in his Guide; but that on their arrival at a
Village, he enquired of the first Fellow he saw, whether they were in the Road
to Bristol. 'Whence did you come?' cries the Fellow. 'no Matter,' says Jones, a
little hastily, 'I want to know if this be the Road to Bristol.' 'The Road to
Bristol!' cries the Fellow, scratching his Head, 'Why, Master, I believe you
will hardly get to Bristol this Way to Night.' Prithee, Friend, then,' answered
Jones, 'do tell us which is the Way. -- 'Why, Measter,' cries the Fellow, 'you
must have come out of your Road the Lord knows whither: For thick Way goes to
Gloucester.' 'Well, and which Way goes to Bristol', said Jones, Why, you be
going away from Bristol,' answered the Fellow. -- 'Then,' said Jones, 'we must
go back again.' 'Ay, you must,' said the Fellow. 'Well, and when we come back
to the Top of the Hill, which Way must we take?' 'Why you must keep the strait
Road.' But I remember there are two Roads, one to the Right and the other to
the Left.' Why you must keep the right hand Road, and then gu strait vorwards;
only remember to turn first to your Right, and then to your Left again, and
then to your Right; and that brings you to the Squire's, and then you must keep
strait vorwards, and turn to the Left.'

Another Fellow now came up, and asked which Way the Gentlemen were going? --
of which being informed by Jones, he first scratched his Head, and then leaning
upon a Pole he had in his Hand, began to tell him, That he must keep the
Right Hand Road for about a Mile or a Mile and half or zuch a Matter, and then
he must turn short to the Left, which would bring him round by Measter Jin
Bearnes's.' But which is Mr. John Bearnes's,' says Jones. 'O Lord,' cries the
Fellow, 'why don't you know Measter Jin Bearnes? Whence then did you come?

These two Fellows had almost conquered the Patience of Jones, when a plain
well-looking Man (who was indeed a Quaker) accosted him thus: Friend, I
perceive thou have lost thy Way, and if thou will take my Advice thou will not
attempt to find it to Night. It is almost dark, and the Road is difficult to
hit; besides there have been several Robberies committed lately between this
and Bristol. Here is a very creditable good House just by, where thou may
find good Entertainment for thyself and thy Cattle till Morning.' Jones, after
a little Persuasion, agreed to stay in this Place till the Morning, and was
conducted by his Friend to the Public-House.

The Landlord, who was a very civil Fellow, told Jones, 'he hoped he would
excuse the Badness of his Accommodation: For that his wife was gone from home,
and had locked up almost every Thing, and carried the Keys along with her.'
Indeed, the Fact was, that a favorite Daughter of hers was just married, and
gone, that Morning, home with her Husband; and that she and her Mother together
had almost stripped the poor Man of all his Goods, as well as Money: For though he
had several Children, this Daughter only, who was the Mother's Favorite, was
the Object of her Consideration; and to the Humor, of this one Child, she
would, with Pleasure, have sacrificed all the rest, and her Husband into the
Bargain.

Though Jones was very unfit for any Kind of Company, and would have preferred
being alone, yet he could not resist the Importunities of the honest Quaker;
who was the more desirous of sitting with him, from having remarked the
Melancholy which appeared both in his Countenance and Behavior; and which the
poor Quaker thought his Conversation might in some Measure relieve.

After they had passed some Time together, in such a Manner that my honest
Friend might have thought himself at one of his Silent-Meetings, the Quaker
began to be moved by some Spirit or other, probably that of Curiosity; and
said, 'Friend, I perceive some sad Disaster has befallen thee; but, pray be of
Comfort. Perhaps thou have lost a Friend. If so, thou must consider we are all
mortal. And why should thou grieve, when thou know thy Grief will do thy
Friend no Good. We are all born to Affliction. I myself have my Sorrows as well
as thee, and most probably greater Sorrows. Though I have a clear Estate of a
100l. a Year, which is as much as I want, and I have a Conscience, I thank the
Lord, void of Offense. My Constitution is sound and strong, and there is no Man
can demand a Debt of me nor accuse me of an Injury -- yet, Friend, I should be
concerned to think thee as miserable as myself.

Here the Quaker ended with a deep Sigh; and Jones presently answered, 'I am
very sorry, Sir, for your Unhappiness, whatever is the Occasion of it.' Ah!
Friend,' replied the Quaker, 'one only Daughter is the Occasion. One who was my
greatest Delight upon Earth, and who within this Week is run away from me, and
is married against my Consent. I had provided her a proper Match, a sober Man,
and one of Substance; but she, forsooth, would choose for herself, and away she
is gone with a young Fellow not worth a Groat. If she had been dead, as I
suppose thy Friend is, I should have been happy!' 'That is very strange, Sir,'
said Jones. 'Why would it not be better for her to be dead, than to be a
Beggar?' replied the Quaker: 'For, as I told you, the Fellow is not worth a
Groat; and surely she cannot expect that I shall ever give her a Shilling. No,
as she has married for Love, let her live on Love if she can; let her carry
her Love to Market, and see whether any one will change it into Silver, or even
into Halfpence.' 'You know your own Concerns best, Sir,' said Jones. 'It must
have been,' continued the Quaker, 'a long premeditated Scheme to cheat me: For
they have known one another from their infancy; and I always preached to her
against Love -- and told her a thousand Times over, it was all Folly and
Wickedness. Nay, the cunning Slut pretended to hearken to me, and to despise
all Wantonness of the Flesh; and yet at last, to break out of a Window up two
pair of Stairs: For I began, indeed, a little to suspect her, and had locked
her up carefully, intending the very next Morning to have married her up to my
Liking. But she disappointed me within a few Hours, and escaped away to the
Lover of her own choosing, who lost no Time: For they were married and bedded,
and all within an Hour.

But it shall be the worst Hour's Work for them both that ever they did, for
they may starve, or beg, or steal together for me. I will never give either of
them a Farthing. Here Jones starting up, cried, I really must be excused, I
wish you would leave me.' 'Come, come, Friend, said the Quaker, don't give Way
to Concern. You see there are other People miserable, besides yourself.' 'I see
there are Madmen and Fools and Villains in the World,' cries Jones -- 'But let
me give you a Piece of Advice; send for your Daughter and Son-in-law home, and
don't be yourself the only Cause of Misery to one you pretend to love.' Send
for her and her Husband home!' cries the Quaker loudly, 'I would sooner send
for the two greatest Enemies I have in the World!' 'Well go home yourself, or
where you please,' said Jones: 'For I will sit no longer in such Company. ' --
Nay, Friend,' answered the Quaker, I scorn to impose my Company on any one.' He
then offered to pull Money from his Pocket, but Jones pushed him with some
Violence out of the Room.

The Subject of the Quaker's Discourse had so deeply affected Jones, that he
stared very wildly all the Time he was speaking. This the Quaker had observed,
and this, added to the rest of his Behavior, inspired honest Broadbrim with a
Conceit, that his Companion was in reality out of his Senses. Instead of
resenting the Affront, therefore, the Quaker was moved with Compassion for his
unhappy Circumstances; and having communicated his Opinion to the Landlord, he
desired him to take great Care of his Guest, and to treat him with the highest
Civility.

'Indeed,' says the Landlord, 'I shall use no such Civility toward him: For it
seems, for all his laced Waistcoat there, he is no more a Gentleman than
myself; but a poor Parish Bastard bred up at a great Squire's about 30 Miles
off, and now turned out of Doors, (not for any good to be sure.) I shall get
him out of my House as soon as possible. If I do lose my Reckoning, the first
Loss is always the best. It is not above a Year ago that I lost a
Silver-spoon.'

'What do thou talk of a Parish Bastard, Robin?' answered the Quaker. 'Thou
must certainly be mistaken in thy Man.'

'Not at all,' replied Robin, 'the Guide, who knows him very well, told it me.'
For, indeed, the Guide had no sooner taken his Place at the Kitchen-Fire, than
he acquainted the whole Company with all he knew, or had ever heard concerning
Jones.

The Quaker was no sooner assured by this Fellow of the Birth and low Fortune
of Jones, than all Compassion for him vanished; and the honest, plain Man went
home fired with no less Indignation than a Duke would have felt at receiving an
Affront from such a Person.

The Landlord himself conceived an equal Disdain for his Guest; so that when
Jones rung the Bell in order to retire to Bed, he was acquainted that he could
have no Bed there. Besides Disdain of the mean Condition of his Guest, Robin
entertained violent Suspicion of his Intentions, which were, he supposed, to
watch some favorable Opportunity of robbing the House. In reality, he might
have been very well eased of these Apprehensions by the prudent Precautions of
his Wife and Daughter, who had already removed every thing which was not fixed
to the Freehold; but he was by Nature suspicious, and had been more
particularly so since the Loss of his Spoon. In short, the Dread of being
robbed, totally absorbed the comfortable Consideration that he had nothing to
lose.

Jones being assured that he could have no Bed, very contentedly betook himself
to a great Chair made with Rushes, when Sleep, which had lately shunned his
Company in much better Apartments, generously paid him a Visit in his humble
Cell.

As for the Landlord, he was prevented by his Fears from retiring to Rest. He
returned therefore to the Kitchen Fire, whence he would survey the only Door
which opened into the Parlour, or rather, Hole, where Jones was seated; and as
for the Window to that Room, it was impossible for any Creature larger than a
Cat to have made his Escape through it.

CHAP. XI. The Adventure of a Company of Soldiers.
THE Landlord having taken his Seat directly opposite to the Door of the
Parlour, determined to keep Guard there the whole Night. The Guide and another
Fellow remained long on Duty with him, though they neither knew his Suspicions,
nor had any of their own. The true Cause of their watching did indeed, at
length, put an End to it; for this was no other than the Strength and Goodness
of the Beer, of which having tippled a very large Quantity, they grew at first
very noisy and vociferous, and afterward fell both asleep.

But it was not in the Power of Liquor to compose the Fears of Robin. He
continued still waking in his Chair, with his Eyes fixed steadfastly on the Door
which led into the Apartment of Mr. Jones, till a violent Thundering at his
outward Gate called him from his Seat, and obliged him to open it; which he had
no sooner done, than his Kitchen was immediately full of Gentlemen in red
Coats, who all rushed upon him in as tumultuous a Manner, as if they intended
to take his little Castle by Storm.

The Landlord was now forced from his Post to furnish his numerous Guests with
Beer, which they called for with great Eagerness; and upon his second or third
Return from the Cellar, he saw Mr. Jones standing before the Fire in the midst
of the Soldiers; for it may easily be believed, that the Arrival of so much
good Company should put an End to any Sleep, unless that from which we are only
to be awakened by the last Trumpet.

The Company having now pretty well satisfied their Thirst, nothing remained
but to pay the Reckoning, a Circumstance often productive of much Mischief and
Discontent among the inferior Rank of Gentry; who are apt to find great
Difficulty in assessing the Sum, with exact Regard to distributive Justice,
which directs, that every Man shall pay according to the Quantity which he
drinks. This Difficulty occurred upon the present Occasion; and it was the
greater, as some Gentlemen had, in their extreme Hurry, marched off, after
their first Draught, and had entirely forgot to contribute any thing toward
the the said Reckoning.

A violent Dispute now arose, in which every Word may be said to have been
deposed upon Oath; for the Oaths were at least equal to all the other Words
spoken. In this Controversy, the whole Company spoke together, and every Man
seemed wholly bent to extenuate the Sum which fell to his Share; so that the
most probable Conclusion which could be foreseen, was, that a large Portion of
the Reckoning would fall to the Landlord's Share to pay, or (what is much the
same thing) would remain unpaid.

All this while Mr. Jones was engaged in Conversation with the Sergeant; for
that Officer was entirely unconcerned in the present Dispute, being privileged,
by immemorial Custom, from all Contribution.

The Dispute now grew so very warm, that it seemed to draw toward a military
Decision, when Jones stepping forward, silenced all their Clamours at once, by
declaring that he would pay the whole Reckoning, which indeed amounted to no
more than three Shillings and four-pence.

This Declaration procured Jones the Thanks and Applause of the whole Company.
The Terms honorable, noble, and worthy Gentleman, resounded through the Room;
nay, my Landlord himself began to have a better Opinion of him, and almost to
disbelieve the Account which the Guide had given.

The Sergeant had informed Mr. Jones, that they were marching against the
Rebels, and expected to be commanded by the glorious Duke of Cumberland. By
which the Reader may perceive (a Circumstance which we have not thought
necessary to communicate before) that this was the very Time when the late
Rebellion was at the highest; and indeed the Banditti were now marched into
England, intending, as it was thought, to fight the King's Forces, and to
attempt pushing forward to the Metropolis.

Jones had some Heroic Ingredients in his Composition, and was a hearty
Well-wisher to the glorious Cause of Liberty, and of the Protestant Religion.
It is no wonder, therefore, that in Circumstances which would have warranted a
much more romantic and wild Undertaking, it should occur to him to serve as a
Volunteer in this Expedition.

Our commanding Officer had said all in his Power to encourage and promote this
good Disposition, from the first Moment he had been acquainted with it. He now
proclaimed the noble Resolution aloud, which was received with great Pleasure
by the whole Company, who all cried out, 'God bless King George, and your
Honor;' and then added, with many Oaths, 'We will stand by you both to the
last Drops of our Blood.'

The Gentleman, who had been all Night tippling at the Alehouse, was prevailed
on by some Arguments which a Corporal had put into his Hand, to undertake the
same Expedition. And now the Portmanteau belonging to Mr. Jones being put up in
the Baggage-cart, the Forces were about to move forwards; when the Guide,
stepping up to Jones, said, 'Sir, I hope you will consider that the Horses have
been kept out all Night, and we have traveled a great ways out of our Way.'
Jones was surprised at the Impudence of this Demand, and acquainted the
Soldiers with the Merits of his Cause, who were all unanimous in condemning the
Guide for his Endeavors to put upon a Gentleman. Some said, he ought to be
tied Neck and Heels; others, that he deserved to run the Gauntlope; and the
Sergeant shook his Cane at him, and wished he had him under his Command,
swearing heartily he would make an Example of him.

Jones contented himself, however, with a negative Punishment, and walked off
with his new Comrades, leaving the Guide to the poor Revenge of cursing and
reviling him, in which latter the Landlord joined, saying, 'Ay, ay, he is a
pure one, I warrant you. A pretty Gentleman, indeed, to go for a Soldier. He
shall wear a laced Waistcoat truly. It is an old Proverb and a true one, all is
not Gold that glisters. I am glad my House is well rid of him.'

All that Day the Sergeant and the young Soldier marched together; and the
former, who was an arch Fellow, told the latter many entertaining Stories of
his Campaigns, though in Reality he had never made any; for he was but lately
come into the Service, and had, by his own Dexterity, so well ingratiated
himself with his Officers, that he had promoted himself to a Halberd, chiefly
indeed by his Merit in recruiting, in which he was most excellently well
skilled.

Much Mirth and Festivity passed among the Soldiers during their March. In
which the many Occurrences that had passed at their last Quarters were
remembered, and every one, with great Freedom, made what Jokes he pleased on
his Officers, some of which were of the coarser Kind, and very near bordering
on Scandal. This brought to our Hero's Mind the Custom which he had read of
among the Greeks and Romans, of indulging, on certain Festivals and solemn
Occasions, the Liberty to Slaves, of using an uncontrouled Freedom of Speech
toward their Masters.

Our little Army, which consisted of two Companies of Foot, were now arrived at
the Place where they were to halt that Evening. The Sergeant then acquainted
his Lieutenant, who was the commanding Officer, that they had picked up two
Fellows in that Day's March; one of which, he said, was as fine a Man as ever
he saw (meaning the Tippler) for that he was near six Feet, well-proportioned,
and strongly limbed; and the other, (meaning Jones,) would do well enough for
their rear Rank.

The new Soldiers were now produced before the Officer, who having examined the
six Foot Man, he being first produced, came next to survey Jones; at the first
Sight of whom, the Lieutenant could not help showing some Surprise; for,
besides that he was very well dressed, and was naturally genteel, he had a
remarkable Air of Dignity in his Look, which is rarely seen among the Vulgar,
and is indeed not inseparably annexed to the Features of their Superiors.

'Sir,' said the Lieutenant, 'my Sergeant informed me, that you are desirous of
enlisting in the Company I have at present under my command; if so, Sir, we
shall very gladly receive a Gentleman who promises to do much Honor to the
Company, by bearing Arms in it.'

Jones answered: 'That he had not mentioned any thing of enlisting himself;
that he was most zealously attached to the glorious Cause for which they were
going to fight, and was very desirous of serving as a Volunteer;' concluding
with some Compliments to the Lieutenant, and expressing the great Satisfaction
he should have in being under his Command.

The Lieutenant returned his Civility, commended his Resolution, shook him by
the Hand, and invited him to dine with himself and the rest of the Officers.

CHAP. XII. The Adventure of a Company of Officers.
THE Lieutenant, whom we mentioned in the preceding Chapter, and who commanded
this Party, was now near sixty Years of Age. He had entered very young into the
Army, and had served in the Capacity of an Ensign at the Battle of Tannieres;
here he had received two Wounds, and had so well distinguished himself, that he
was by the Duke of Marlborough advanced to be a Lieutenant, immediately after
that Battle.

In this Commission he had continued ever since, viz. near forty Years; during
which Time he had seen vast Numbers preferred over his Head, and had now the
Mortification to be commanded by Boys, whose Fathers were at Nurse when he had
first entered into the Service.

Nor was this ill Success in his Profession solely owing to his having no
Friends among the Men in Power. He had the Misfortune to incur the Displeasure
of his Colonel, who for many Years continued in the Command of this Regiment.
Nor did he owe the implacable Ill Will which this Man bore him to any Neglect
or Deficiency as an Officer, nor indeed to any Fault in himself; but solely to
the Indiscretion of his Wife, who was a very beautiful Woman, and who, though she
was remarkably fond of her Husband, would not purchase his Preferment at the
Expense of certain Favors which the Colonel required of her.

The poor Lieutenant was more peculiarly unhappy in this, that while he felt
the Effects of the Enmity of his Colonel, he neither knew, nor suspected, that
he really bore him any; for he could not suspect an Ill Will for which he was
not conscious of giving any Cause; and his Wife, fearing what her Husband's
nice Regard to his Honor might have occasioned, contented herself with
preserving her Virtue, without enjoying the Triumphs of her Conquest.

This unfortunate Officer (for so I think he may be called) had many good
Qualities, besides his Merit in his Profession; for he was a religious, honest,
good natured Man; and had behaved so well in his Command, that he was highly
esteemed and beloved, not only by the Soldiers of his own Company; but by the
whole Regiment.

The other Officers who marched with him were a French Lieutenant, who had been
long enough out of France to forget his own Language, but not long enough in
England to learn ours, so that he really spoke no Language at all, and could
barely make himself understood, on the most ordinary Occasions. There were
likewise two Ensigns, both very young Fellows; one of whom had been bred under
an Attorney, and the other was Son to the Wife of a Nobleman's Butler.

As soon as Dinner was ended, Jones informed the Company of the Merriment which
had passed among the Soldiers upon their March; 'and yet,' says he,
'notwithstanding all their Vociferation, I dare swear they will behave more
like Grecians than Trojans when they come to the Enemy.' 'Grecians and
Trojans!' says one of the Ensigns, 'who the Devil are they? I have heard of all
the Troops in Europe, but never of any such as these.'

'Don't pretend to more Ignorance than you have, Mr. Northerton,' said the
worthy Lieutenant, 'I suppose you have heard of the Greeks and Trojans, though,
perhaps, you never read Pope's Homer; who, I remember, now the Gentleman
mentions it, compares the March of the Trojans to the Cackling of Geese, and
greatly commends the Silence of the Grecians. And upon my Honor, there is
great Justice in the Cadet's Observation.'

'Begar, me remember them ver well,' said the French Lieutenant, 'me ave read
them at School in dans Madam Daciere, des Greek, des Trojan, dey fight for von
Woman -- ouy, ouy, me ave read all dat.'

'D -- n Homo with all my Heart,' says Northerton, 'I have the Marks of him in
my A -- yet. There Is Thomas of our Regiment, always carries a Homo in his
Pocket: D -- n me if ever I come at it, if I don't burn it. And there is
Corderius, another d -- n'd Son of a Whore that has got me many a Flogging.'

'Then you have been at School, Mr. Northerton?' said the Lieutenant.'

'Ay d -- n me have I,' answered he, 'the Devil take my Father for sending me
thither. The old Put wanted to make a Parson of me, but d -- n me, thinks I to
myself, I Will nick you there, old Cull: The Devil a Smack of your Nonsense,
shall you ever get into me. There Is Jimmey Oliver of our Regiment, he narrowly
escaped being a Pimp too; and that would have been a thousand Pities: For d --
n me if he is not one of the prettiest Fellows in the whole World; but he went
farther than I with the old Cull: For Jimmey can neither write nor read.'

'You give your Friend a very good Character,' said the Lieutenant, 'and a very
deserved one, I dare say; but prithee, Northerton, leave off that foolish as
well as wicked Custom of swearing: For you are deceived, I promise you, if you
think there is Wit or Politeness in it. I wish too, you would take my Advice,
and desist from abusing the Clergy. Scandalous Names and Reflections cast on
any Body of Men, must be always unjustifiable; but especially so when thrown on
so sacred a Function: For to abuse the Body is to abuse the Function itself;
and I leave to you to judge how inconsistent such a Behavior is in Men, who
are going to fight in Defense of the Protestant Religion.'

Mr. Adderley, which was the Name of the other Ensign, had sat hitherto kicking
his Heels and humming a Tune, without seeming to listen to the Discourse; he
now answered, ' O Monsieur, on ne parle pas de la Religion dans la Guerre.'
'Well said, Jack,' cries Northerton, 'if la Religion was the only Matter, the
Parsons should fight their own Battles for me.'

'I don't know, Gentlemen,' says Jones, 'what may be your Opinion; but I think
no Man can engage in a nobler Cause than that of his Religion; and I have
observed in the little I have read of History, that no Soldiers have fought so
bravely, as those who have been inspired with a religious Zeal: For my own
Part, though I love my King and Country, I hope, as well as any Man in it, yet
the Protestant Interest is no small Motive to my becoming a Volunteer in the
Cause.'

Northerton now winked on Adderley, and whispered to him slily, 'Smoke the
Prig, Adderley, smoke him.' Then turning to Jones, said to him, 'I am very
glad, Sir, you have chosen our Regiment to be a Volunteer in: For if our Parson
should at any Time take a Cup too much, I find you can supply his Place. I
presume, Sir, you have been at the University, may I crave the Favor to know
what College?'

'Sir,' answered Jones, 'so far from having been at the University, I have not
even had the Advantage of yourself: for I was never at School.'

'I presumed,' cries the Ensign, 'only upon the Information of your great
Learning' -- Oh! Sir,' answered Jones, 'it is as possible for a Man to know
something without having been at School; as it is to have been at School and to
know nothing.'

'Well said, young Volunteer,' cries the Lieutenant, 'upon my Word, Northerton,
you had better let him alone, for he will be too hard for you.'

Northerton did not very well relish the Sarcasm of Jones; but he thought the
Provocation was scarce sufficient to justify a Blow, or a Rascal, or Scoundrel,
which were the only Repartees that suggested themselves. He was, therefore,
silent at present; but resolved to take the first Opportunity of returning the
Jest by Abuse.

It now came to the Turn of Mr. Jones to give a Toast, as it is called; who
could not refrain from mentioning his dear Sophia. This he did the more
readily, as he imagined it utterly impossible, that any one present should
guess the Person he meant.

But the Lieutenant, who was the Toast-master, was not contented with Sophia
only. He said, he must have her Surname; upon which Jones hesitated a little,
and presently after named Miss Sophia Western. Ensign Northerton declared, he
would not drink her Health, in the same Round with his own Toast, unless
somebody would vouch for her. 'I knew one Sophy Western,' says he, that was
lainwith by half the young Fellows at Bath; and, perhaps, this is the same
Woman.' Jones very solemnly assured him of the contrary; asserting that the
young Lady he named was one of great Fashion and Fortune. 'Ay, ay,' says the
Ensign, 'and so she is, d -- n me it is the same Woman, and I Will hold Half a
Dozen of Burgundy, Tom French of our Regiment brings her into Company with us
at any Tavern in Bridges-street.' He then proceeded to describe her Person
exactly, (for he had seen her with her Aunt) and concluded with saying, 'That
her Father had a great Estate in Somersetshire.'

The Tenderness of Lovers can ill brook the least jesting with the Names of
their Mistresses. However, Jones, though he had enough of the Lover and of the
Hero too in his Disposition, did not resent these Slanders as hastily as,
perhaps, he ought to have done. To say the Truth, having seen but little of
this Kind of Wit, he did not readily understand it, and for a long Time
imagined Mr. Northerton had really mistaken his Charmer for some other. But now
turning to the Ensign with a stern Aspect, he said, 'Pray, Sir, choose some
other Subject for your Wit: For I promise you I will bear no jesting with this
Lady's Character.' 'Jesting,' cries the other, 'd -- n me if ever I was more in
Earnest in my Life. Tom French of our Regiment had both her and her Aunt at
Bath.' 'Then I must tell you in Earnest,' cries Jones, 'that you are one of the
most impudent Rascals upon Earth.'

He had no sooner spoken these Words, than the Ensign, together with a Volly of
Curses, discharged a Bottle full at the Head of Jones, which hitting him a
little above the right Temple, brought him instantly to the Ground.

The Conqueror perceiving the Enemy to lie motionless before him, and Blood
beginning to flow pretty plentifully from his Wound, began now to think of
quitting the Field of Battle, where no more Honor was to be gotten; but the
Lieutenant interposed, by stepping before the Door, and thus cut off his
Retreat.

Northerton was very importunate with the Lieutenant for his Liberty; urging
the ill Consequences of his Stay, asking him, what could he have done less!
'Zounds!' says he, 'I was but in Jest with the Fellow. I never heard any Harm
of Miss Western in my Life.' 'Have not you?' said the Lieutenant. 'then you
richly deserve to be hanged, as well for making such Jests, as for using such a
Weapon. You are my Prisoner, Sir; nor shall you stir from hence, till a proper
Guard comes to secure you.'

Such an Ascendant had our Lieutenant over this Ensign, that all that Fervency
of Courage which had levelled our poor Hero with the Floor, would scarce have
animated the said Ensign to have drawn his sword against the Lieutenant, had he
then had one dangling at his Side; but all the Swords being hung up in the
Room, were at the very Beginning of the Fray, secured by the French Officer. So
that Mr. Northerton was obliged to attend the final Issue of this Affair.

The French Gentleman and Mr. Adderley, at the Desire of their
Commanding-Officer, had raised up the Body of Jones; but as they could perceive
but little (if any) sign of Life in him, they again let him fall. Adderley
damning him for having blooded his Waistcoat; and the Frenchman declaring,
'Begar me no tush de Engliseman de mort, me ave heard de Englise Ley, Law, what
you call, hang up de Man dat tush him last.'

When the good Lieutenant applied himself to the Door, he applied himself
likewise to the Bell; and the Drawer immediately attending, he dispatched him
for a File of Musketeers and a Surgeon. These Commands, together with the
Drawer's Report of what he had himself seen, not only produced the Soliders,
but presently drew up the Landlord of the House, his Wife and Servants, and,
indeed, every one else, who happened, at that Time, to be in the Inn.

To describe every Particular, and to relate the whole Conversation of the
ensuing Scene, is not within my Power, unless I had forty Pens, and could, at
once, write with them altogether, as the Company now spoke. The Reader must,
therefore, content himself with the most remarkable Incidents, and perhaps he
may very well excuse the rest.

The first Thing done, was securing the Body of Northerton, who being delivered
into the Custody of six Men with a Corporal at their Head, was by them
conducted from a Place which he was very willing to leave, but it was unluckily
to a Place whither he was very unwilling to go. To say the Truth, so whimsical
are the Desires of Ambition, the very Moment this Youth had attained the
abovementioned Honor, he would have been well contented to have retired to
some Corner of the World, where the Fame of it should never have reached his
Ears.

It surprises us, and so, perhaps, it may the Reader, that the Lieutenant, a
worthy and good Man, should have applied his chief Care, rather to secure the
Offender, than to preserve the Life of the wounded Person. We mention this
Observation, not with any View of pretending to account for so odd a Behavior,
but lest some Critic should hereafter plume himself on discovering it. We would
have these Gentlemen know we can see what is odd in Characters as well as
themselves, but it is our Business to relate Facts as they are; which when we
have done, it is the Part of the learned and sagacious Reader to consult that
original Book of Nature, whence every Passage in our Work is transcribed, though
we quote not always the particular Page for its Authority.

The Company which now arrived were of a different Disposition. They suspended
their Curiosity concerning the Person of the Ensign, till they should see him
hereafter in a more engaging Attitude. At present, their whole Concern and
Attention were employed about the bloody Object on the Floor; which being
placed upright in a Chair, soon began to discover some Symptoms of Life and
Motion. These were no sooner perceived by the Company (for Jones was, at first,
generally concluded to be dead) than they all fell at once to prescribing for
him: (For as none of the physical Order was present, every one there took that
Office upon him.)

Bleeding was the Unanimous Voice of the whole Room; but unluckily there was no
Operator at hand: Every one then cried, 'Call the Barber'; but none stirred a
Step. Several Cordials were likewise prescribed in the same ineffective Manner;
till the Landlord ordered up a Tankard of his strong Beer, with a Toast, which
he said was the best Cordial in England.

The Person principally assistant on this Occasion, indeed the only one who did
any Service, or seemed likely to do any, was the Landlady. She cut off some of
her Hair, and applied it to the Wound to stop the Blood. She fell to chafing
the Youth's Temples with her Hand; and having expressed great Contempt for her
Husband's Prescription of Beer, she dispatched one of her Maids to her own
Closet for a Bottle of Brandy, of which, as soon as it was brought, she
prevailed upon Jones, who was just returned to his Senses, to drink a very
large and plentiful Draught.

Soon afterward arrived the Surgeon, who having viewed the Wound, having
shaken his Head, and blamed every Thing which was done, ordered his Patient
instantly to Bed; in which Place, we think proper to leave him, some Time, to
his Repose, and shall here, therefore, put an End to this Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the great Address of the Landlady; the great Learning
of a Surgeon, and the solid Skill in Casuistry of the worthy Lieutenant.
WHEN the wounded Man was carried to his Bed, and the House began again to
clear up from the Hurry which this Accident had occasioned; the Landlady thus
addressed the commanding Officer. 'I am afraid, Sir,' said she, 'this young Man
did not behave himself as well as he should do to your Honors; and if he had
been killed, I suppose he had had but his Deserts; to be sure when Gentlemen
admit inferior Parsons into their Company, they often to keep their Distance;
but, as my first Husband used to say, few of them knew how to do it. For my own
Part, I am sure, I should not have suffered any Fellows to include themselves
into Gentlemen's Company: but I thoft he had been an Officer himself, till the
Sergeant told me he was but a Recruit.

'Landlady,' answered the Lieutenant, 'you mistake the whole Matter. The young
Man behaved himself extremely well, and is, I believe a much better Gentleman
than the Ensign, who abused him. If the young Fellow dies, the Man who struck
him will have most Reason to be sorry for it: For the Regiment will get rid of
a very troublesome Fellow, who is a Scandal to the Army; and if he escapes from
the Hands of Justice, blame me, Madam, that is all.

'Ay! Ay! good Lack-a-day!' said the Landlady, 'who could have thoft it? Ay,
ay, ay, I am satisfied your Honor will see Justice done; and to be sure it often
to be to every one. Gentlemen often not to kill poor Folks without answering for
it. A poor Man has a Soul to be saved as well as his Betters.'

'Indeed, Madam, said the Lieutenant, you do the Volunteer wrong; I dare swear
he is more of a Gentleman than the Officer.'

'Ay,' cries the Lanlady, 'why look you there now: Well, my first Husband was a
wise Man; he used to say, you cannot always know the Inside by the Outside. Nay,
that might have been well enough too: For I never sawed him till he was all
over Blood. Who would have thoft it! mayhap, some young Gentleman crossed in
Love. Good Lack-a-day! if he should die, what a Concern it would be to his
Parents! Why sure the Devil must possess the wicked Wretch to do such an Act.
To be sure he is a Scandal to the Army, as your Honor says: For most of the
Gentlemen of the Army that ever I saw, are quite different Sort of People, and
look as if they would scorn to spill any Christian Blood as much as any Men. I
mean, that is, in a civil Way, as my first Husband used to say. To be sure,
when they come into the Wars, there must be Bloodshed; but they are not to be
blamed for that. The more of our Enemies they kill there, the better; and I
wish, with all my Heart, they could kill every Mother's Son' of them.

'O fie! Madam,' said the Lieutenant smiling, 'ALL is rather too bloody-minded
a Wish.'

'Not at all, Sir,' answered she, 'I am not at all bloody-minded, only to our
Enemies, and there is no Harm in that. To be sure it is natural for us to wish
our Enemies, dead, that the Wars may be at an End, and our Taxes be lowered:
For it is a dreadful Thing to pay as we do. Why now there is above forty
Shillings for Window-lights, and yet we have stopped up all we could; we have
almost blinded the House I am sure: Says I to the Exciseman, says I, I think
you often to favor us, I am sure we are very good Friends to the Government; and
so we are for sartain: For we pay a Mint of Money to 'um. And yet I often think
to myself, the Government does not imagine itself more obliged to us, than to
those that don't pay 'um a Farthing.' Ay, ay; it is the Way of the World.

She was proceeding in this Manner, when the Surgeon entered the Room. The
Lieutenant immediately asked how his Patient did? But he resolved him only by
saying, 'Better, I believe, than he would have been by this Time, if I had not
been called; and even as it is, perhaps it would have been lucky if I could
have been called sooner.' I hope, Sir,' said the Lieutenant, 'the Skull is not
fractured.' Hum,' cries the Surgeon, 'Fractures are not always the most
dangerous Symptoms. Contusions and Lacerations are often attended with worse
Phenomenon, and with more fatal Consequences than Fractures. People who know
nothing of the Matter conclude, if the Skull is not fractured, all is well;
whereas, I had rather see a Man's Skull broke all to Pieces, than some
Contusions I have met with. I hope,' says the Lieutenant, 'there are no such
Symptoms here:' 'Symptoms,' answered the Surgeon, 'are not always regular nor
constant. I have known very unfavourable Symptoms in the Morning change to
favorable ones at Noon, and return to unfavourable again at Night. Of Wounds,
indeed, it is rightly and truly said, Nem^ repent fuit turpissimus. I was
once, I remember, called to a Patient, who had received a violent Contusion in
his Tibia, by which the exterior Cutis was lacerated, so that there was a
profuse sanguinary Discharge; and the interior Membranes were so divellicated;
that the Os or Bone very plainly appeared through the Aperture of the Vulnus or
Wound. Some febrile Symptoms intervening at the same Time, (for the Pulse was
exuberant and indicated much Phlebotomy) I apprehended an immediate
Mortification. To prevent which I presently made a large Orifice in the Vein of
the left Arm, whence I drew twenty Ounces of Blood; which I expected to have
found extremely sizy and glutinous, or indeed coagulated, as it is in pleuritic
Complaints; but, to my Surprise, it appeared rosy and florid, and its
Consistency differed little from the Blood of those in perfect Health. I then
applied a Fomentation to the Part, which highly answered the Intention, and
after three or four Times dressing, the Wound began to discharge a thick Pus or
Matter, by which Means the Cohesion -- but perhaps I do not make myself
perfectly well understood.' 'No really,' answered the Lieutenant, 'I cannot say
I understand a Syllable.' 'Well, Sir,' said the Surgeon, 'then I shall not tire
your Patience; in short, within six Weeks, my Patient was able to walk upon his
Legs, as perfectly as he could have done before he received the Contusion.' 'I
wish, Sir,' said the Lieutenant, 'you would be so kind only to inform me,
whether the Wound this young Gentleman has had the Misfortune to receive is
likely to prove mortal?' 'Sir,' answered the Surgeon, 'to say whether a Wound
will prove mortal or not at first Dressing, would be very weak and foolish
Presumption: We are all mortal, and Symptoms often occur in a Cure which the
greatest of our Profession could never foresee.' -- 'But do you think him in
Danger?' says the other. 'In Danger! ay, surely,' cries the Doctor, 'who is
there among us, who in the most perfect Health can be said not to be in Danger?
Can a Man, therefore, with so bad a Wound as this be said to be out of Danger?
All I can say, at present, is, that it is well I was called as I was, and
perhaps it would have been better if I had been called sooner. I will see him
again early in the Morning, and in the mean Time let him be kept extremely
quiet, and drink liberally of Water Gruel.' 'Won't you allow him Sack-whey,'
said the Landlady? 'Ay, ay, Sack-whey,' cries the Doctor, 'if you will,
provided it be very small.' 'And a little Chicken-broth too,' added she?' --
'Yes, yes, Chicken-broth,' said the Doctor, 'is very good.' 'May'nt I make him
some Jellies too,' said the Landlady?' 'Ay, ay,' answered the Doctor, 'Jellies
are very good for Wounds, for they promote Cohesion.' And, indeed, it was lucky
she had not named Soop or high Sauces, for the Doctor would have complied,
rather than have lost the Custom of the House.

The Doctor was no sooner gone, than the Landlady began to trumpet forth his
Fame to the Lieutenant, who had not, from their short Acquaintance conceived
quite so favorable an Opinion of his physical Abilities, as the good Woman,
and all the Neighborhood entertained; (and indeed very rightly) for though I am
afraid the Doctor was a little of a Coxcomb, he might be nevertheless very much
of a Surgeon.

The Lieutenant having collected from the learned Discourse of the Surgeon,
that Mr. Jones was in great Danger, gave Orders for keeping Mr. Northerton
under a very strict Guard, intending in the Morning to attend him to a Justice
of Peace, and to commit the conducting the Troops to Gloucester to the French
Lieutenant, who, though he could neither read, write, nor speak any language,
was, however, a good Officer.

In the Evening our Commander sent a Message to Mr. Jones, that if a Visit
would not be troublesome he would wait on him. This Civility was very kindly
and thankfully received by Jones, and the Lieutenant accordingly went up to his
Room; where he found the wounded Man much better than he expected; nay, Jones
assured his Friend, that if he had not received express Orders to the contrary
from the Surgeon, he should have got up long ago: For he appeared to himself to
be as well as ever, and felt no other Inconvenience from his Wound but an
extreme Soreness on that Side of his Head.

'I should be very glad,' quoth the Lieutenant, 'that you was as well as you
fancy yourself: For then you would be able to do yourself Justice immediately;
for when a Matter cannot be made up, as in Case of a Blow, the sooner you take
him out the better; but I am afraid you think yourself better than you are, and
he would have too much Advantage over you.'

'I'll try, however,' answered Jones, 'if you please, and will be so kind to
lend me a Sword: For I have none here of my own.'

'My Sword is heartily at your Service,' my dear Boy, cries the Lieutenant,
kissing him, 'you are, a brave Lad, and I love your Spirit; but I fear your
Strength: For such a Blow, and so much Loss of Blood, must have very much
weakened you; and though you feel no Want of Strength in your Bed, yet you most
probably would after a Thrust or two. I cannot consent to your taking him out
Tonight; but I hope you will be able to come up with us before we get many
Days March advance; and I give you my Honor you shall have Satisfaction, or
the Man who has injured you shall not stay in our Regiment.'

'I wish,' said Jones, 'it was possible to decide this Matter Tonight; now you
have mentioned it to me, I shall not be able to rest.'

'O never think of it,' returned the other, 'a few Days will make no
Difference. The Wounds of Honor are not like those in your Body. They suffer
nothing by the Delay of Cure. It will be altogether as well for you, to receive
Satisfaction a Week hence as now.'

'But suppose,' says Jones, 'I should grow worse, and die of the Consequences
of my present Wound.'

'Then your Honor,' answered the Lieutenant, 'will require no Reparation at
all. I myself will do Justice to your Character, and will testify to the World
your Intention to have acted properly, if you had recovered.'

'Still,' replied Jones, 'I am concerned at the Delay. I am almost afraid to
mention it to you who are a Soldier; but though I have been a very wild young
Fellow, still in my most serious Moments, and at the Bottom, I am really a
Christian.'

'So am I too, I assure you,' said the Officer: 'And so zealous a one, that I
was pleased with you at Dinner for taking up the Cause of your Religion: and I
am a little offended with you now, young Gentleman, that you should express a
Fear of declaring your Faith before any one.'

'But how terrible must it be,' cries Jones, 'to any one who is really a
Christian, to cherish Malice in his Breast, in Opposition to the Command of him
who has expressly forbid it? How can I bear to do this on a sick Bed? Or how
shall I make up my Account, with such an Article as this in my' Bosom against
me?

'Why I believe there is such a Command,' cries the Lieutenant; 'but a Man of
Honor cannot keep it. And you must be a Man of Honor, if you will be in the
Army. I remember I once put the Case to our Chaplain over a Bowl of Punch, and
he confessed there was much Difficulty in it; but said, he hoped there might be
a Latitude granted to Soldiers in this one Instance; and to be sure it is our
Duty to hope so: For who would bear to live without his Honor? No, no, my dear
Boy, be a good Christian as long as you live; but be a Man of Honor too, and
never put up an Affront; not all the Books, nor all the Parsons in the World,
shall ever persuade me to that. I love my Religion very well, but I love my
Honor more. There must be some Mistake in the wording the Text, or in the
Translation, or in the understanding it, or somewhere or other. But however
that be, a Man must run the Risque, for he must preserve his Honor. So compose
yourself Tonight, and I promise you, you shall have an Opportunity of doing
yourself Justice.' Here he gave Jones a hearty Buss, shook him by the Hand, and
took his Leave.

But though the Lieutenant's Reasoning was very satisfactory to himself, it was
not entirely so to his Friend. Jones therefore having revolved this Matter much
in his Thoughts, at last came to a Resolution, which the Reader will find in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. A most dreadful Chapter indeed; and which few Readers ought to
venture upon in an Evening, especially when alone.
JONES swallowed a large Mess of Chicken, or rather Cock, Broth, with a very
good Appetite, ^^ indeed he would have done the Cock it was made ^f, with a
Pound of Bacon into the Bargain; and ^ow, finding in himself no Deficiency of
either Health or Spirit, he resolved to get up and seek his ^nemy.

But first he sent for the Sergeant, who was his first ^cquaintance among these
military Gentlemen. Un^^ckily that worthy Officer having, in a literal Sense,
taken his Fill of Liquor, had been some Time retired to his Bolster, where he
was snoaring so loud, that it was not easy to convey a Noise in at his Ears
capable of drowning that which issued from hi^ Nostrils.

However, as Jones persisted in his Desire of seeing him, a vociferous Drawer
at length found Means to disturb his Slumbers, and to acquaint him with the
Message. Of which the Sergeant was no sooner made sensible, than he arose from
his Bed, and having his Clothes already on, immediately attended. Jones did not
think fit to acquaint the Sergeant with his Design, though he might have done it
with great Safety; for the Halberdier was himself a Man of Honor, and had
killed his Man. He would therefore have faithfully kept this Secret, or indeed
any other which no Reward was published for discovering. But as Jones knew not
these Virtues in so short an Acquaintance, his Caution was perhaps prudent and
commendable enough.

He began therefore by acquainting the Sergeant, that now he was entered into
the Army, he was ashamed of being without what was perhaps the most necessary
Implement of a Soldier, namely, a Sword; adding, that he should be infinitely
obliged to him if he could procure one. 'For which,' says he, 'I will give you
any reasonable Price. Nor do I insist upon its being Silver-hilted, only a good
Blade, and such as may become a Soldier's Thigh.'

The Sergeant, who well knew what had happened, and had heard that Jones was in
a very dangerous Condition, immediately concluded, from such a Message, at such
a Time of Night, and from a Man in such a Situation, that he was lightheaded.
Now as he had his Wit (to use that Word in its common Signification) always
ready, he bethought himself of making his Advantage of this Humor in the sick
Man. 'Sir,' says he, 'I believe I can fit you. I have a most excellent Piece of
Stuff by me. It is not indeed Silver-hilted, which, as you say, does not become
a Soldier; but the Handle is decent enough, and the Blade one of the best in
Europe. -- It is a Blade that -- a Blade that -- In short, I will fetch it you
this Instant, and you shall see it and handle it. -- I am glad to see your
Honor so well with all my Heart.'

Being instantly returned with the Sword, he delivered it to Jones, who took it
and drew it; and then told the Sergeant it would do very well, and bid him name
his Price.

The Sergeant now began to harangue in Praise of his Goods. He said (nay he
swore very heartily) 'that the Blade was taken from a French Officer of very
high Rank, at the Battle of Dettingen. I took it myself,' says he, 'from his
Side after I had knocked him of the Head. The Hilt was a golden one. That I
sold to one of our fine Gentlemen; for there are some of them, an't please your
Honor, who value the Hilt of a Sword more than the Blade.'

Here the other stopped him, and begged him to name a Price. The Sergeant, who
thought Jones absolutely out of his Senses, and very near his End, was afraid,
lest he should injure his Family by asking too little -- However, after a
Moment's Hesitation, he contented himself with naming twenty Guineas, and swore
he would not sell it for less to his own Brother.

Twenty Guineas!' says Jones, in the utmost Surprise, 'sure you think I am mad,
or that I never saw a Sword in my Life. Twenty Guineas indeed! I did not
imagine you would endeavor to impose upon me. -- Here, take the Sword -- No,
now I think on it, I will keep it myself, and show it your Officer in the
Morning, acquainting him, at the same Time, what a Price you asked me for it.'

The Sergeant, as we have said, had always his Wit (in sensu praedicto) about
him, and now plainly saw that Jones was not in the Condition he had apprehended
him to be; he now, therefore, counterfeited as great Surprise as the other had
shown, and said, 'I am certain, Sir, I have not asked you so much out of the
way. Besides, you are to consider, it is the only Sword I have, and I must run
the Risque of my Officer's Displeasure, by going without one myself. And truly,
putting all this together, I don't think twenty Shillings was so much out of
the Way.'

'Twenty Shillings!' cries Jones, 'why you just now asked me twenty Guineas.'
'How! cries the Sergeant -- 'Sure your Honor must have mistaken me; or else I
mistook myself -- and indeed I am but half awake -- Twenty Guineas indeed! no
wonder your Honor flew into such a Passion. I say twenty Guineas too -- No,
no, I meant twenty Shillings, I assure you. And when your Honor comes to
consider every thing, I hope you will not think that so extravagant a Price. It
is indeed true, you may buy a Weapon which looks as well for' less Money. But
--

Here Jones interrupted him, saying, 'I will be so far from making any Words
with you, that I will give you a Shilling more than your Demand.' He then gave
him a Guinea, bid him return to his Bed, and wished him a good March; adding,
he hoped to overtake them before the Division reached Worcester.

The Sergeant very civilly took his Leave, fully satisfied with his
Merchandise, and not a little pleased with his dextrous Recovery from that
false Step into which his Opinion of the Sick Man's Light-headedness had
betrayed him.

As soon as the Sergeant was departed, Jones rose from his Bed, and dressed
himself entirely, putting on even his Coat, which, as its color was white,
showed very visibly the Streams of Blood which had flowed down it; and now,
having grasped his newpurchased Sword in his Hand, he was going to issue forth,
when the Thought of what he was about to undertake laid suddenly hold of him,
and he began to reflect that in a few Minutes he might possibly deprive a human
Being of Life, or might lose his own. 'Very well,' said he, 'and in what Cause
do I venture my Life? Why, in that of my Honor. And who is this human Being? A
Rascal who has injured and insulted me without Provocation. But is not Revenge
forbidden by Heaven? -- Yes, but it is enjoined by the World. Well, but shall I
obey the World in Opposition to the express Commands of Heaven? Shall I incur
the divine Displeasure rather than be called -- Ha -- Coward -- Scoundrel? --